Beauty and the Beast (1946 film)
 
{{Infobox film
| name           = Beauty and the Beast
| image          = La Belle et la Bête film.jpg
| caption        = Film poster
| director       = Jean Cocteau
| producer       = André Paulvé
| screenplay     = Jean Cocteau
| based on       =  
| starring       = Jean Marais Josette Day Mila Parély Nane Germon Michel Auclair Marcel André
| music          = Georges Auric
| cinematography = Henri Alekan
| editing        = Claude Iberia
| distributor    = DisCina
| released       =  
| runtime        = 93 minutes
| country        = France
| language       = French
| budget         =
| gross          =
}} romantic fantasy the same name, written by Jeanne-Marie Leprince de Beaumont and published in 1757 as part of a fairy tale anthology ( ).  Directed by French poet and filmmaker Jean Cocteau, the film stars Josette Day as Belle and Jean Marais.

The plot of Cocteaus film revolves around Belles father who is sentenced to death for picking a rose from Beasts garden. Belle offers to go back to the Beast in her fathers place. Beast falls in love with her and proposes marriage on a nightly basis which she refuses. Belle eventually becomes more drawn to Beast, who tests her by letting her return home to her family and telling her that if she doesnt return to him within a week, he will die of grief.

==Plot==
While scrubbing the floor at home, Belle (Josette Day) is interrupted by her brothers friend Avenant (Jean Marais) who tells her she deserves better and suggests they get married. Belle rejects Avenant, as she wishes to stay home and take care of her father, who has suffered much since his ships were lost at sea and the family fortune along with them. Belles father (Marcel André) arrives home announcing he has come into a great fortune that he will pick up the next day, along with gifts for his daughters, Belles shrewish sisters Adelaide and Felicie. Belles roguish brother Ludovic (Michel Auclair) signs a contract from a moneylender (Raoul Marco) allowing him the ability to sue Ludovics father if he cant pay. 

Later, Belles father finds on his arrival that his fortune has been seized to clear his debts and he is forced to return home through a forest at night. Belles father gets lost in the forest and finds himself at a large castle whose gates and doors magically open themselves. On entering the castle, he is guided by an enchanted candelabra that leads him to a laden dinner table where he falls asleep. Awakened by a loud roar, he wanders the castles grounds. Remembering that Belle asked for a rose, he plucks a rose from a tree which makes the Beast (Jean Marais) appear. The Beast threatens to kill him for theft but then suggests that one of his daughters can take his place. The Beast offers his horse Magnificent to guide him through the forest home. 

Belles father explains the situation to his family and Avenant. Belle agrees to go and take her fathers place. She rides Magnificent to the castle, finding the Beast. Belle faints at the sight of him and is carried to her room in the castle. Belle awakens to find a magic mirror which allows her to see anything. The Beast invites Belle to dinner, where he tells her that shes in equal command to him and that she will be asked every day to marry him. Days pass as Belle grows more accustomed to and fond of the Beast, but she continues to refuse marriage. Using the magic mirror, Belle finds her father deathly ill. The Beast grants her permission to leave for a week. He gives Belle two magical items: a glove that can transport her wherever she wishes and a golden key that unlocks Dianas Pavilion, the source of the Beasts true riches.

Belle uses the glove to appear in her bedridden fathers room, where her visit restores him to health. Belle finds her family living in poverty, having never recovered from Ludovics deal with the moneylender. Jealous of Belles rich life at the castle, Adelaide and Felicie steal her golden key and devise a plan to turn Ludovic and Avenant against the Beast. Avenant and Ludovic devise a plan of their own to kill the Beast, and agree to aid Belles sisters. To stall Belle, her sisters trick her into staying past her seven day limit by pretending to love her. Belle reluctantly agrees to stay. 

The Beast sends Magnificent with the magic mirror to retrieve Belle but Ludovic and Avenant find Magnificent first, and ride him to the castle. Belle later finds the mirror which reveals the Beasts sorrowful face in its reflection. Belle realizes she is missing the golden key as the mirror breaks. Distraught, Belle returns to the castle using the magic glove and finds the Beast in the courtyard, near death from a broken heart. 
 Diana and is himself turned into a Beast. As this happens, arising from where the Beast lay dead, is Prince Ardent (Jean Marais) who is cured of being the Beast. He explains that because his parents did not believe in spirits, in revenge the spirits turned him into the Beast. Prince Ardent and Belle embrace, then fly away to his kingdom where she will be his Queen, and where her father will stay with them and Belles sisters will carry the train of her gown.

==Cast==
* Jean Marais as La Bête (The Beast) / The Prince / Avenant
* Josette Day as Belle
* Mila Parély as Félicie
* Nane Germon as Adélaïde
* Michel Auclair as Ludovic
* Raoul Marco as The Usurer
* Marcel André as Belles Father

==Preamble==
After the opening credits, Cocteau briefly breaks the fourth wall with a written preamble: 
 
 
: 

: 

: 
 
:Children believe what we tell them.  They have complete faith in us. They  believe  that a rose plucked from a garden can plunge a family into conflict. They  believe  that the hands of a human beast will smoke when he slays a victim, and that this will cause him shame when a young maiden takes up residence in his home. They believe a thousand other simple things.
 Open Sesame":

:Once upon a time...
 

==Production==
The score was composed by Georges Auric, and the cinematography by Henri Alekan. Christian Bérard and Lucien Carré covered production design. As mentioned in the DVD extras the exteriors were shot in the Château de la Roche Courbon (Indre-et-Loire).

The set designs and cinematography were intended to evoke the illustrations and engravings of Gustave Doré and, in the farmhouse scenes, the paintings of Jan Vermeer.

==Reception==
Upon the films December 1947 New York City release, critic Bosley Crowther called the film a "priceless fabric of subtle images,...a fabric of gorgeous visual metaphors, of undulating movements and rhythmic pace, of hypnotic sounds and music, of casually congealing ideas"; according to Crowther, "the dialogue, in French, is spare and simple, with the story largely told in pantomime, and the music of Georges Auric accompanies the dreamy, fitful moods. The settings are likewise expressive, many of the exteriors having been filmed for rare architectural vignettes at Raray, one of the most beautiful palaces and parks in all France. And the costumes, too, by Christian Bérard and Escoffier, are exquisite affairs, glittering and imaginative."  According to Time magazine, the film is a "wondrous spectacle for children of any language, and quite a treat for their parents, too"; but the magazine concludes "Cocteau makes about a half-hour too much of a good thing&mdash;and few things pall like a dream that cannot be shaken off." 

In 1999 Chicago Sun-Times critic Roger Ebert added the film to his The Great Movies list, calling it "one of the most magical of all films" and a "fantasy alive with trick shots and astonishing effects, giving us a Beast who is lonely like a man and misunderstood like an animal."   A 2002 Village Voice review found the films "visual opulence" "both appealing and problematic", saying "Full of baroque interiors, elegant costumes, and overwrought jewelry (even tears turn to diamonds), the film is all surface, and undermines its own dont-trust-a-pretty-face and anti-greed themes at every turn."  In 2010, the film was ranked #26 in Empire (magazine)|Empire magazines "100 Best Films of World Cinema". 

==Related works==

===Departures from original tale===
 
This film adaptation of La Belle et la Bete adds a subplot involving Belles suitor Avenant, who schemes along with Belles brother and sisters to journey to Beasts castle to kill him and capture his riches while the sisters work to delay Belles return to the castle. When Avenant enters the magic pavilion which is the source of Beasts power, he is struck by an arrow fired by a guardian statue of the Roman goddess Diana, which transforms Avenant into Beast as Belle declares her love for the Beast and reverses the original Beasts curse. When the Beast comes back to life and becomes human at the end, he transforms into a Prince Charming with Avenants handsome features, but without his oafish personality.

The adaptation also borrows from   by Madame dAulnoy|Marie-Cathérine dAulnoy, published in  , in which servants, previously magically reduced to their arms and hands, still perform all servants chores.

In the original tale, Belle has three brothers, whereas in the film, she only has one. Also in the original tale, Belle and her family are forced to move to a farmstead in the countryside after the loss of their fortune; in the film, they continue to live in their townhouse. Also in the original tale, the sisters are turned into statues as punishment for their cruelty, whereas in the film, they are merely forced to carry the train of Belles gown at her wedding, though it is implied that they will now be her servants.

In the fairytale, Belle repeatedly has dreams about a handsome prince (the Beast in his true form) imploring her to love the Beast, to which she replies she cannot. She believes this Prince is, like herself, a captive in the Beasts castle and searches for him during the day. This does not occur in the film.

Jean Marais originally suggested to Cocteau for the beast to have a stags head,  obviously remembering a detail in the fairy tale ( ): The knocker at the gate to the castle of the princess/The White Cat has the form of a roes foot. While this suggestion followed the narrative lines of its fairy tale origin and would have evoked the mythical echo of Cernunnos, the Celtic stag-headed god of the woods. Marais idea was nonetheless refused by Cocteau who feared that in the eyes of modern cinema audiences a stags head would turn the beast into a laughing-stock.

===Adaptations and homages=== Criterion Collection DVD and Blu-ray release offers the ability to view the movie while listening to either Glasss score or the original soundtrack.)

*American singer-songwriter Stevie Nicks wrote her 1983 ballad "Beauty and the Beast" after screening the film for the second time. While playing the song in concert, the film plays on the screen behind her and the band.

*The fourteenth episode of Faerie Tale Theatre featured an adaptation of Beauty And The Beast which was an homage to this film. It borrowed many visual elements, including the makeup for the beast, along with segments of the dialogue translated from French into English. It featured Susan Sarandon as Belle and Klaus Kinski as the Beast.
 Angels in America features a dream sequence which duplicates the set design of the Beasts castle.  A character is shown reading a book about Cocteau before the dream begins.
 Jacques Demys Peau dÂne Charles Perraults incestuous fairy tale about a widowed king who wishes to marry his beautiful daughter. Demy pays homage to Cocteau in numerous references to Beauty And The Beast, including the casting of actor Jean Marais as the king. At one point, the king woos the princess by reading from Cocteaus poem, "Ode à Picasso." 

==References==
 
;Citations
 

;References
 
* Marie-Cathérine dAulnoy, La Chatte blanche, in: Les Contes des Fées, Paris 1697-1698, reprinted in German in: Französische Märchen, Auswahl und Einleitung von Jack Zipes, Frankfurt/Main, Verlag Zweitausendeins, Lizenausgabe des Insel-Verlages, Mainz/Leipzig 1991, S. 123-156.
* Jeanne-Marie Le Prince de Beaumont, La Belle et la bête, in: Le Magasin des Enfants, ou Dialogues entre une sage gouvernante et ses élèves, London 1757, reprinted in German in: Französische Märchen, Auswahl und Einleitung von Jack Zipes, Frankfurt/Main, Verlag Zweitausendeins, Lizenausgabe des Insel-Verlages, Mainz/Leipzig 1991, S. 321-336.
 

==External links==
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  by Geoffrey O’Brien
*  by Francis Steegmuller

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 