The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari
 
 
{{Infobox film
| name           = The Cabinet of Dr.  Caligari
| image          = Das-Cabinet-des-Dr-Caligari-poster.jpg
| caption        = Theatrical release poster
| writer         = {{plainlist|
* Hans Janowitz
* Carl Mayer
}}
| starring       = {{plainlist|
* Werner Krauss
* Conrad Veidt
* Friedrich Fehér
* Lil Dagover Hans Twardowski
}}
| director       = Robert Wiene 
| producer       = {{plainlist|
* Rudolf Meinert
* Erich Pommer
}}
| music          = Giuseppe Becce
| cinematography = Willy Hameister
| editing        = 
| distributor    = Decla-Bioscop
| released       =  
| runtime        = 71 minutes
| country        = Weimar Republic German intertitles
| budget         = 
| gross          = 
}} silent horror German Expressionist somnambulist (Conrad Veidt) to commit murders. The film features a dark and twisted visual style, with sharp-pointed forms, oblique and curving lines, structures and landscapes that lean and twist in unusual angles, and shadows and streaks of light painted directly onto the sets.
 twist ending, reveals the main narrative is actually the delusion of a madman. Janowitz has claimed this device was forced upon the writers against their will. The films design was handled by Hermann Warm,   and  , who recommended a fantastic, graphic style over a naturalistic one.

The film thematizes brutal and irrational authority; Dr. Caligari represents the German war government, and Cesare is symbolic of the common man conditioned, like soldiers, to kill. In his influential book From Caligari to Hitler, Siegfried Kracauer says the film reflects a subconscious need in German society for a tyrant, and is an example of Germanys obedience to authority and unwillingness to rebel against deranged authority. He says the film is a premonition of the rise of Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party, and says the addition of the frame story turns an otherwise "revolutionary" film into a "conformistic" one. Other themes of the film include the destabilized contrast between insanity and sanity, the subjective perception of reality, and the duality of human nature.
 arthouse films. Considered a classic, it helped draw worldwide attention to the artistic merit of German cinema and had a major influence on American films, particularly in the genres of horror and film noir.

==Plot== flashback of Francis story, which takes places in Holstenwall, a shadowy village of twisted buildings and spiraling streets. Francis and his friend Alan (Hans Heinrich von Twardowski), who are good-naturedly competing for Janes affections, plan to visit the town fair. Meanwhile, a mysterious man named Dr. Caligari (Werner Krauss) seeks a permit from the rude town clerk to present a spectacle at the fair, which features a somnambulist named Cesare (Conrad Veidt). The clerk mocks and berates Dr. Caligari, but ultimately approves the permit. That night, the clerk is found stabbed to death in his bed.

The next morning, Francis and Alan visit Dr. Caligaris spectacle, where he opens a coffin-like box to reveal the sleeping Cesare. Upon Dr. Caligaris orders, Cesare awakens and answers questions from the audience. Despite Francis protests, Alan asks "How long will I live?". To Alans horror, Cesare answers, "Until dawn." Later that night, a figure breaks into Alans home and stabs him to death in his bed. A grief-stricken Francis investigates Alans murder with help from Jane and her father, Dr. Olsen (Rudolf Lettinger), who obtains police authorization to investigate the somnambulist. That night, the police apprehend a criminal (Rudolf Klein-Rogge) with a knife who is caught attempting to murder an elderly woman. When questioned by Francis and Dr. Olson, the criminal confesses he tried to kill the elderly woman, but denies any part in the two deaths; he was only trying to divert blame onto the murderer.

At night, Francis spies on Dr. Caligari, and observes what appears to be Cesare sleeping in his box. However, the real Cesare sneaks into Janes home as she sleeps. He raises a knife to stab her, but instead abducts her after a struggle, dragging her through the window onto the street. Chased by an angry mob, Cesare eventually drops Jane and flees, but collapses and dies. Francis also confirms the criminal has been locked away and could not have been involved in the abduction. Francis and the police investigate Dr. Caligaris sideshow and realize the Cesare that appears to lay sleeping in the box is only a dummy. Dr. Caligari escapes in the confusion, but Francis follows him to an insane asylum.

Upon further investigation, Francis is shocked to learn that Dr. Caligari is the asylums director. With help from the asylum staff, Francis studies the directors records and diary while the director is sleeping. The writings reveal his obsession with the story of an 18th-century mystic named Caligari, who used a somnambulist named Cesare to commit murders in northern Italy towns. The director, in his determination to understand the earlier Caligari, experiments on a somnambulist admitted to the asylum, who becomes his Cesare. The director screams "I must become Caligari!". Francis and the doctors call the police to Dr. Caligaris office, where they show him Cesares corpse. Dr. Caligari then attacks one of the staff. He is restrained in a straitjacket and becomes an inmate in his own asylum.
 twist ending, however, it is revealed that Francis is actually an asylum inmate. Jane and Cesare are patients as well, but Jane believes she is a queen, and Cesare is awake. The man Francis believes is Dr. Caligari is actually the asylum director. Francis attacks him, but is restrained in a straitjacket and placed in the same cell Dr. Caligari was confined to in his story. The director announces that, now that he understands Francis delusion, he is confident he can cure him.

== Cast ==
* Werner Krauß as Dr. Caligari
* Conrad Veidt as Cesare
* Friedrich Feher as Franzis
* Lil Dagover as Jane
* Hans Heinrich von Twardowski as Alan
* Rudolf Lettinger as Dr. Olsen
*   as Old Man on Bench
*   as Young Doctor
* Ludwig Rex as Criminal
* Elsa Wagner as Landlady

==Production==

===Writing===
The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari was written by Hans Janowitz and Carl Mayer, both of whom were pacifists by the time they met following World War I.       Janowitz served as an officer during the war, but the experience left him embittered with the military, which affected his writing.     Meyer feigned madness to avoid military service during the war,     which led him to intense examinations from a military psychiatrist.      The experience left him distrustful of authority,   and the psychiatrist served as a model for the Dr. Caligari character.       Janowitz and Mayer were introduced in June 1918 by a mutual friend, actor Ernst Deutsch.    Both writers were penniless at the time.     , an actress with whom Mayer was in love, encouraged Janowitz and Mayer to write a film together. She later became the basis for the Jane character. Langer also encouraged Janowitz to visit a fortune teller, who predicted that Janowitz would survive his military service during the war, but Langer would die. This prediction proved true, as Langer died unexpectedly in 1920, and Janowitz said it inspired the scene in which Cesare predicts Alans death at the fair.  

Although neither had any associations the film industry,    Janowitz and Mayer wrote a script over six weeks during the winter of 1918–19.    In describing their roles, Janowitz called himself "the father who planted the seed, and Mayer the mother who conceived and ripened it".    The Expressionist filmmaker Paul Wegener was among their influences.   The story was partially inspired by a circus sideshow the two visited on Kantstrasse in Berlin,     called "Man or Machine?", in which a man performed feats of great strength after becoming hypnotized.    They first visualized the story of Caligari the night of that show.  Several of Janowitzs past experiences influenced his writing, including memories of his hometown of Prague,     and, as he put it, a mistrust of "the authoritative power of an inhuman state gone mad" due to his military service.  Janowitz also believed he had witnessed a murder in 1913 near an amusement park on Hamburgs Reeperbahn, beside the Holstenwall, which served as another inspiration for the script. According to Janowitz, he observed a woman disappear into some bushes, from which a respectable-looking man emerged a few moments later, and the next day Janowitz learned the girl was murdered.          Holstenwall later became the name of the town setting in Caligari.   

Janowitz and Mayer are said to have set out to write a story denouncing arbitrary authority as brutal and insane.  Janowitz said it was only years after the film was released that he realized exposing the "authoritative power of an inhuman state" was the "subconscious intention" of the writers.     However, Hermann Warm, who designed the films sets, said Mayer had no political intentions when he wrote the film.       Film historian David Robinson noted Janowitz did not refer to anti-authority intentions in the script until many decades after Caligari was released, and he suggested Janowitzs recollection may have changed in response to later interpretations to the film.  The film they wrote was entitled Das Cabinet of Dr. Caligari, using the English spelling "Cabinet" rather than the German "Kabinett".     The completed script contained 141 scenes.    Janowitz has claimed the name "Caligari", which was not settled upon until after the script was finished, was inspired by a rare book called ‘’Unknown Letters of Stendhal’, which featured a letter from the French novelist Stendhal referring to a French officer named Caligari he met at the La Scala theater in Milan.    However, no record of any such letter exists, and film historian John D. Barlow suggested Janowitz may have fabricated the story.    The physical appearance of Dr. Caligari was inspired by portraits of the German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer.    The characters name is spelled "Calligaris" in the only known surviving script, although in some instances the final "s" is removed. Other character names are also spelled differently from the final film: Cesare appears as "Caesare", Alan is "Allan" or sometimes "Alland" and Dr. Olfen is "Dr. Olfens". Likewise, unnamed characters in the final film have names in the script, including the town clerk ("Dr. Lüders") and the house-breaker ("Jakob Straat").   
 Expressionist influence that are prevalent in the films sets and costumes.  Through film director Fritz Lang, Janowitz and Mayer met with Erich Pommer, head of production at the Babelsberg Studio|Decla-Bioscop film studio, on 19 April 1919, to discuss selling the script.   According to Pommer, he attempted to get rid of them, but they persisted until he agreed to meet with them.   Pommer reportedly asked the writers to leave the script with him, but they refused, and instead Mayer read it aloud to him.  Pommer and his assistant, Julius Sternheim, were so impressed that he refused to let them leave until a contract was signed, and he purchased the script from them that night.     The writers had originally sought no fewer than 10,000 marks, but were given 3,500, with the promise of another 2,000 once the film went into production and 500 if it was sold for foreign release, which the producers considered unlikely.  The contract, today preserved at Berlins Bundesfilmarchiv, gave Pommer the right to make any changes to the script deemed appropriate. Pommer said he was drawn to the script because he believed it could be filmed inexpensively, and it bore similarities to films inspired by the macabre horror shows of the Grand Guignol theater in Paris, which were popular at the time.  Pommer later said: "They saw in the script an experiment. I saw a relatively cheap film".   

====Frame story====
The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari makes use of a "Rahmenerzählung", or frame story.    Both a prologue and epilogue establish the main body of the film as a flashback,  an innovative technique at the time.       Lang has said that, during early discussions about his possible involvement with the film, he suggested the addition opening scene with a "normal" style, which would lead the public into the rest of the film without confusion.        However, it remains unclear whether Lang suggested the frame story structure itself, or simply gave advice on how to write a frame story that was already agreed upon,  and some writers, like David Robinson, have questioned whether Langs recollection is correct.  Director Robert Wiene was supportive of the changes.  Janowitz has claimed he and Mayer were not privy to discussions about adding the frame story and strongly opposed its inclusion, believing it had deprived the film of its revolutionary and political significance;   he wrote that it was "an illicit violation, a raping of our work" that turned the film "into a cliché ... in which the symbolism was to be lost".  Janowitz claims the writers sought legal action to stop the change, but were unsuccessful.  He also claims they did not see the finished film with the frame story until a preview was shown to studio heads, after which the writers "expressed our dissatisfaction in a storm of thunderous remonstrances". They had to be persuaded not to publicly protest the film.   
 Themes section for more.) No surviving copies of the script were believed to exist to confirm this fact, until the early 1950s when actor Werner Krauss revealed he still had his copy.   Krauss refused to part with it, and it was not until 1978, after his death, that it was purchased by the German film archive Deutsche Kinemathek.   It remained unavailable for public consumption until 1995, when a full transcript was published. 

The script revealed that a frame story indeed was part of the original Caligari screenplay, albeit a significantly different one than that in the final film.    The original manuscript opens on an elegant terrace of a large villa, where Francis and Jane are hosting a party, and the guests insist that Francis tell them a story that happened to him 20 years earlier. The conclusion to the frame story is missing from the script.   Critics widely agree that the discovery of the screenplay strongly undermines Kracauers theory,   with some, like German film historian Stephen Brockmann, even arguing it disproves his claims altogether.  Others, however, like John D. Barlow, argues it does not completely settle the issue, as the original screenplays frame story simply serves to introduce the main plot, rather than subvert it as the final films version does. 

===Development=== The Spiders, so Wiene was selected instead.         According to Janowitz, Wienes father, a successful theater actor, had "gone slightly mad when he could no longer appear on the stage", and Janowitz believed that experience helped Wiene bring an "intimate understanding" to the source material of Caligari. 

  Visual Style for more.) According to Warm, the three approached Wiene with the idea and he immediately agreed,    although Wiene has made claims that he conceived the films Expressionist style.  Meinert agreed to the idea after one days consideration, telling Warm, Reimann and Röhrig to make the sets as "crazy" and "eccentrically" as possible.   He embraced the idea for commercial, not aesthetic reasons: Expressionism was fashionable at the time, so he concluded even if film received bad reviews, the artistic style would garner attention and make it profitable. 
 Hollywood films.  The predominant attitude at the time was that artistic achievement led to success in exports to foreign film markets.    The dominance of Hollywood at the time, coupled with a period of inflation and currency devaluation, forced German film studios to seek projects that could be made inexpensively, with a combination of realistic and artistic elements so the films would be accessible to American audiences, yet also distinctive from Hollywood films.   Pommer has claimed while Mayer and Janowitz expressed a desire for artistic experimentation in the film, his decision to use painted canvases as scenery was primarily a commercial one, as they would be a significant financial saving over building sets.    
 cubist painters" and hired Reimann and Röhrig as a result.  David Robinson argues this story was probably an embellishment stemming from Janowitzs disdain for the two artists.  Janowitz has claimed that he and Mayer conceived the idea of painting the sets on canvas, and that the shooting script included written directions that the scenery be designed in Kubins style.   However, the later rediscovery of the original screenplay refutes this claim, as it includes no such directions about the sets.  This was also disputed in a 1926 article by Barnet Braverman in Billboard (magazine)|Billboard magazine, which claimed the script included no mention of an unconventional visual style, and that Janowitz and Mayer in fact strongly opposed the stylization. She claims Mayer later came to appreciate the visual style, but that Janowitz remained opposed to it years after the films release. 

The set design, costumes and props took about two weeks to prepare.    Warm worked primarily on the sets, while Röhrig handled the painting and Reimann was responsible for the costumes.  Robinson noted the costumes in Caligari seem to resemble a wide variety of time periods. For example, Dr. Caligari and the fairground workers costumes resemble the Biedermeier era, while Janes embody Romanticism. Additionally, Robinson wrote, Cesares costume and those of  policemen in the film appear abstract, while many of the other characters seem like ordinary German clothes from the 1920s.    The collaborative nature of the films production highlights the importance that both screenwriters and set designers held in German cinema of the 1920s,   although film critic Lotte H. Eisner said sets held more importance than anything else in German films at that time.  The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari was the first German Expressionist film,  although Brockmann and film critic Mike Budd claims it was also influenced by German Romanticism;       Budd notes the films themes of insanity and the outcry against authority are common among German Romanticism in literature, theater and the visual arts.  Film scholar Vincent LoBrutto said the theater of Max Reinhardt and the artistic style of Die Brücke were additional influences on Caligari.   

===Casting===
 , who portrayed Dr. Caligari, suggested changes to his own make-up and costumes so they would match the films Expressionist style.]]
Janowitz originally intended the part of Cesare to go to his friend, actor Ernst Deutsch.   Mayer wrote the part of Jane for Gilda Langer, but she died before she could take the role.  Janowitz claimed he wrote the part of Dr. Caligari specifically for Werner Krauss, who Deutsch had brought to his attention during rehearsals for a Max Reinhardt play; Janowitz said only Krauss or Paul Wegener could have played the part.  The parts of Dr. Caligari and Cesare ultimately went to Krauss and Conrad Veidt, respectively, who enthusiastically took part in many aspects of the production.  Krauss suggested changes to his own make-up and costumes, including the elements of a top hat, cape, and walking stick with an ivory handle for his character.    The actors in Caligari were conscious of the need to adapt their make-up, costumes style and appearance to match the visual style of the film.    Much of the acting in German silent films at the time was already Expressionistic, mimicking the pantomimic aspects of Expressionist theater.  The performances of Krauss and Veidt in Caligari was typical of this style, as they both had experience in Expressionist-influenced theater, and as a result John D. Barlow said they appear more comfortable in their surroundings in the film than the other actors.  Prior to filming, Kraus and Veidt appeared on stage in the winter of 1918 in an Expressionist drama, Reinhold Goerings Seeschlacht, at the Deutsches Theater.  By contrast, Dagover had little experience in Expressionist theater, and Barlow argues her acting is less harmonious with the films visual style. 

Wiene asked the actors to make movements similar to dance, most prominently from Veidt, but also from Krauss, Dagover and Friedrich Feger, who played Francis.  Krauss and Veidt are the only actors whose performances fully match the stylization of the sets, which they achieved by concentrating their movements and facial expressions.     Barlow notes that "Veidt moves along the wall as if it had exuded him ... more a part of a material world of objects than a human one", and Krauss "moves with angular viciousness, his gestures seem broken or cracked by the obsessive force within him, a force that seems to emerge from a constant toxic state, a twisted authoritarianism of no human scruple and total insensibility".  Most of the other actors besides Krauss and Veidt have a more naturalistic style.  Alan, Jane and Francis play the roles of an idyllically happy trio enjoying youth; Alan in particular represents the archetype of a sensitive 19th century student.  Mike Budd points out realist characters in stylized settings are a common characteristic in Expressionist theater.  However, David Robinson notes even the performances of the more naturalistic supporting roles in Caligari have Expressionist elements, like Hans-Heinz von Twardowskis "strange, tormented face" as Alan. He also cites Fehers "large angular movements," especially in the scene where he searches the deserted fairground.  Other minor roles are Expressionistic in nature, like two policemen who sit facing each other at their desks and move with exaggerated symmetry, and two servants who awaken and rise from their beds in perfect synchronization.  Vincent LoBrutto said of the acting in the film: 

 

===Filming===
Shooting for The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari began at the end of December 1919 and concluded at the end of January 1920.     It was shot entirely in a studio without any exterior shots,          which was unusual for films of the time, but dictated by the decision to give the film a stylized Expressionist visual style.    The extent to which Mayer and Janowitz participated during filming is disputed: Janowitz claims the duo repeatedly refused to allow any script changes during production, and Pommer claimed Mayer was on the set for every day of filming.  But Hermann Warm claimed they were never present for any of the shooting or involved in any discussions during production.    

Caligari was filmed in the Lexie-Atelier film studio at Weissensee (Berlin)|Weissensee.   It was the fourth film to be made there, followed by Die Pest in Florenz (1919) and the two parts of Fritz Langs The Spiders.  The studio was built in 1913 for use with the Vitascope GmbH, and as a result was restrictive in scale; most of the sets used in the film do not exceed six meters in width and depth.  However, an understage space was provided for use as a foreground set.  Certain elements from the original script had to be cut from the film due to the limited space, including a procession of gypsies, a handcart pushed by Dr. Caligari, Janes carriage, and a chase scene involving horse-cabs.  Likewise, the script called for a fairground scene with roundabouts, barrel organs, sideshow barkers, performers and menageries, none of which could be achieved in the restrictive space. Instead, the scenes use a painting of the Holstenwall town as a background; throngs of people walk around two spinning merry-go-round props, which creates the impression of a carnival.  The script also made references to modern elements like telephones, telegrams and electric light, but they were eliminated during the filming, leaving the final films setting with no indication of a specific time period. 
 title cards for Caligari featured stylized, misshapen lettering with excessive underlinings, exclamation points and occasionally archaic spellings. The bizarre style, which matches that of the film as a whole, mimics the lettering of Expressionistic posters at the time.       The original title cards were tinted in green, steely-blue and brown. Many modern prints of the film do not preserve the original lettering. 

Photography was provided by Willy Hameister, who went on to work with Wiene on several other films.  The camera does not play a large part in Caligari, and is used primarily to show the sets.     The cinematography tends to alternate only between medium shots at straight-on angles and abrupt close-ups to create a sense of shock, but with few long shots or panning movement.   Likewise, there is very little interscene editing. Most scenes follow the other without intercutting, which gives Caligari a more theatrical feel than a cinematic one.  Heavy lighting is typically absent from the film, heightening the sense of darkness prevalent in the story. However, lighting is occasionally used to intensify the uneasiness created by the distortions of the sets. For example, when Cesare first awakens at the fair, a light is shone directly on a close-up of his heavily made-up face to create an unsettling glow.    Additionally, lighting is used in a then-innovative way to cast a shadow against the wall during the scene in which Cesare kills Alan, so the viewer sees only the shadow and not the figures themselves. Lighting techniques like this became frequently used in later German films.    

==Visual style==
 
The visual style of The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari is dark, twisted and bizarre; radical and deliberate distortions in perspective, form, dimension and scale create a chaotic and unhinged appearance.    The sets are dominated by sharp-pointed forms and oblique and curving lines, with narrow and spiraling streets,   and structures and landscapes that lean and twist in unusual angles, giving the impression they could collapse or explode at any given moment.   Film critic Roger Ebert described it as "a jagged landscape of sharp angles and tilted walls and windows, staircases climbing crazy diagonals, trees with spiky leaves, grass that looks like knives".    The sets are characterized by strokes of bold, black paint.  The landscape of Holstenwall is painted on canvas, as opposed to a constructed set, and shadows and streaks of light are painted directly onto the sets, further distorting the viewers sense of perspective and three-dimensionality.  Buildings are clustered and interconnected in a cubist-like architecture, surrounded by dark and twisted back-alleys.     Lotte Eisner, author of The Haunted Screen, writes that objects in the film appear as if they are coming alive and "seem to vibrate with an extraordinary spirituality".  Likewise, Expressionismus und Film writer Rudolf Kurtz wrote "the dynamic force of objects howls their desire to be created".  The rooms have radically offset windows with distorted frames, doors that are not squared, and chairs that are too tall.       Strange designs and figures are painted on the walls of corridors and rooms, and trees outside have twisted branches that sometimes resemble tentacles. 

As German film professor Anton Kaes wrote, "The style of German Expressionism allowed the filmmakers to experiment with filmic technology and special effects and to explore the twisted realm of repressed desires, unconscious fears, and deranged fixations".    The visual style of Caligari conveys a sense of anxiety and terror to the viewer,  giving the impression of a nightmare or deranged sensibility,   or a place transformed by evil, in a more effective way than realistic locations or conventional design concepts could.  Siegfried Kracauer wrote that the settings "amounted to a perfect transformation of material objects into emotional ornaments".  The majority of the films story are memories recalled by an insane narrator, and as a result the distorted visual style takes on the quality of his mental breakdown,    giving the viewer the impression they are inside the mind of a madman.      As with German Expressionist paintings, the visual style of Caligari reflects an emotional reaction to world,  and in the case of the films characters represents an emotional response to the terror of society that Dr. Caligari and Cesare represent.  Often in the film, set pieces are emblematic of the emotional state of the characters in the scene. For example, the courtyard of the insane asylum during the frame story is vastly out of proportion. The characters seem too big for the small building, and the courtyard floor features a bizarre pattern, all of which represent the patients damaged frames of mind.  Likewise, the scene with the criminal in a prison cell features a set with long vertical painted shadows resembling arrowheads, pointing down at the squatting prisoner in an oppressive effect that symbolizes his broken down state. 

Stephen Brockmann argues the fact that Caligari was filmed entirely in a studio enhances the madness portrayed by the films visuals because "there is no access to a natural world beyond the realm of the tortured human psyche".  The sets occasionally features circular images that reflect the chaos of the film, presenting patterns of movement that seem to be going nowhere, such as the merry-go-round at the fair, moving at a titled angle that makes it appear at risk of collapsing.    Other elements of the film convey the same visual motifs as the sets, including the costumes and make-up design for Dr. Caligari and Cesare, both of which are highly exaggerated and grotesque. Even the hair of the characters is an Expressionistic design element, especially Cesares black, spiky, jagged locks.  They are the only two characters in the film with Expressionistic make-up and costumes,  making them appear as if they are the only ones who truly belong in this distorted world. Despite their apparent normalcy, however, Francis and the other characters never appear disturbed by the madness around them reflected in the sets; they instead react as if they are parts of a normal background.   

A select few scenes disrupt the Expressionistic style of the film, such as in Janes and Alans home, which include normal backgrounds and bourgeois furniture that convey a sense of security and tranquility otherwise absent from the film.   Eisner called this a "fatal" continuity error,    but John D. Barlow disagrees, arguing it is a common characteristic for dream narratives to have some normal elements in them, and that the normalcy of Janes house in particular could represent the feeling of comfort and refuge Francis feels in her presence.  Mike Budd argues while the Expressionistic visual style is jarring and off-putting at first, the characters start to blend more harmoniously as the film progresses, and the setting becomes more relegated into the background. 
 detective story in Franciss search to expose Alans killer, and said it is only the films Expressionist settings that make the film transgressive.  Hans Janowitz has entertained similar thoughts as well: "Was this particular style of painting only a garment in which to dress the drama? Was it only an accident? Would it not have been possible to change this garment, without injury to the deep effect of the drama? I do not know." 

==Themes and interpretations==

===Authority and conformity=== Weimar films that followed it, thematizes brutal and irrational authority by making a violent and possible insane authority figure its antagonist.     Kracauer said Dr. Caligari was symbolic of the German war government and fatal tendencies inherent in the German system, saying the character "stands for an unlimited authority that idolizes power as such, and, to satisfy its lust for domination, ruthlessly violates all human rights and values".  Likewise, John D. Barlow described Dr. Caligari as an example of the tyrannical power and authority that had long plagued Germany, while Cesare represents the "common man of unconditional obedience".     Janowitz has claimed Cesare represents the common citizen who is conditioned to kill or be killed, just as soldiers are trained during their military service, and that Dr. Caligari is symbolic of the German government sending those soldiers off to die in the war.   The control Dr. Caligari yields over the minds and actions of others results in chaos and both moral and social perversion.    Cesare lacks any individuality and is simply a tool of his master; Barlow writes that he is so dependent on Caligari that he falls dead when he strays too far from the source of his sustenance, "like a machine that has run out of fuel".   

In his influential book From Caligari to Hitler, Kracauer argues the Dr. Caligari character is symptomatic of a subconscious need in German society for a tyrant, which he calls the German "collective soul".      Kracauer argues Dr. Caligari and Cesare are premonitions of Adolf Hitler and his rule over Germany, and that his control over the weak-willed, puppet-like somnabolist prefigure aspects of the mentality that allowed the Nazi Party to rise.    He calls Dr. Caligaris use of hypnotism to impose his will foreshadowing of Hitlers "manipulation of the soul".  Kracauer described the film as an example of Germanys obedience to authority and failure or unwillingness to rebel against deranged authority,    and reflects a "general retreat" into a shell that occurred in post-war Germany.  Cesare symbolizes those who have no mind of their own and must follow the paths of others;  Kracauer wrote he foreshadows a German future in which "self-appointed Caligaris hypnotized innumerable Cesares into murder".  Barlow rejects Kracauers claims that the film glorifies authority "just because it has not made a preachy statement against it", and said the connection between Dr. Caligari and Hitler lies in the mood the film conveys, not an endorsement of such tyrant on the films part.   

Everyday reality in Caligari is dominated by tyrannical aspects. Authorities sit atop high perches above the people they deal with and hold offices out of sight at the end of long, forbidding stairways.  Most of the films characters are caricatures who fit neatly into prescribed social roles, such as the outraged citizens chasing a public enemy, the authoritarian police who are deferential to their superiors, the oft-harassed bureaucratic town clerk, and the asylum attendants who act like stereotypical "little men in white suits".  Only Dr. Caligari and Cesare are atypical of social roles,  instead serving as, in Barlows words, "abstractions of social fears, the incarnations of demonic forces of a nightmarish world the bourgeoisie was afraid to acknowledge, where self-assertion is pushed to willful and arbitrary power over others".    Kracauer wrote the film demonstrates a contrast between the rigid control, represented by such characters as Dr. Caligari and the town clerk, and chaos, represented by the crowds of people at the fair and the seemingly never-ending spinning of the merry-go-rounds. He said the film leaves no room for middle ground between these two extremes, and that viewers are forced to embrace either insanity or authoritarian rigidity, leaving little space for human freedom.   Kracauer writes: "Caligari exposes the soul wavering between tyranny and chaos, and facing a desperate situation: any escape from tyranny seems to throw it into a state of utter confusion".   

Dr. Caligari is not the only symbol of arrogant authority in the film. In fact, he is a victim of harsh authority himself during the scene with the dismissive town clerk, who brushes him off and ignores him to focus on his paperwork.   Film historian Thomas Elsaesser argues that Dr. Caligaris murderous rampage through Cesare can be seen as a rebellious, anti-authoritarian streak in response to such experiences as these, even in spite of his own authoritarianism.  The Expressionistic set design in this scene further amplifies the power of the official and the weakness of his supplicant; the clerk towers in an excessively high chair over the small and humiliated Dr. Caligari.     The scene represents class and status differences, and conveys the psychological experience of being simultaneously outraged and powerless in the face of a petty bureaucracy.    Another common visual motif is the use of stairways to illustrate the hierarchy of authority figures, such as the multiple stairs leading up to police headquarters, and three staircases ascending to Dr. Caligari in the asylum. 

Francis expresses a resentment of all forms of authority, particularly during the end of the frame story, when he feels he has been institutionalized because of the madness of the authorities, not because there is anything wrong with him.    Francis can be seen, at least within the main narrative, as a symbol of reason and enlightenment triumphing over the irrational tyrant and unmasking the absurdity of social authority.   But Kracauer contended the frame story undermines that premise. He argues if not for the frame story, the tale of Franciss efforts against Dr. Caligari would have been a praiseworthy example of independence and rebellion against authority. However, with the addition of the frame story, which places the varasity of Franciss claims into question, Kracauer argues the film glorifies authority and turns a reactionary story into an authoritarian film:     "The result of these modifications was to falsify the action and to ultimately reduce it to the ravings of a madman."  Kracauer believed these changes were not necessarily intentional, but rather an "instinctive submission to the necessities of the screen" because commercial films had to "answer to mass desires".  Fritz Lang disagreed with Kracaucers argument, and instead believes the frame story makes the films revolutionary inclinations more convincing, not less.  David Robinson said, as time passed, filmgoers have been less inclined to interpret the film as a vindication of authority because modern audiences have grown more skeptical of authority in general, and are more inclined to believe Franciss story and interpret the asylum director as wrongly committing Francis to silence him.   

===Point of view and perception of reality===
Another major theme of Caligari is, as Stephen Brockmann writes, "the destabilized contrast between insanity and sanity, and hence the destabilization of the very notion of sanity itself".  By the end of the film, viewers realize the story they have been watching has been told from the perspective of an insane narrator, and therefore they cannot accept anything they have seen as reliable truth. The films unusual visual abstractions and other stylized elements serve to show the world as one experienced by a madman.    Similarly, the film has been described as portraying the story as a nightmare and the frame story the real word.  John D. Barlow said the film exemplifies a common Expressionist theme that "the ultimate perception of reality will appear distorted and insane to the healthy and practical mind".  The film serves as a reminder than any story told through a flashback subjectivizes the story from the perspective of the narrator.  At the end of the film, the asylum director gives no indication that he means Francis ill will, and in fact he seems to truly care for his patients. But Francis nevertheless believes he is being persecuted, so in the story as told from his perspective, Dr. Caligari takes on the role of persecutor. 

However, the Expressionistic visual elements of the film are present not only in the main narrative, but also in the epilogue and prologue scenes of frame story, which are supposed to be an objective account of reality.      For example, the frame story scenes still have tress with tentacle-like branches and a high, foreboding wall in the background. Strange leaf and line patterns are seen on the bench Francis sits upon, flame-like geometric designs can be seen on the walls, and his asylum cell has the same distorted shape as in the main narrative.    If the primary story were strictly the delusions of a madman, the frame story would be completely devoid of those elements, but the fact they are present makes it unclear whether that perspective can be taken as reliable either.    Instead, the film offers no true normal world to oppose to that of the twisted and nightmarish world as described by Francis.    As a result, after the films closing scene, it can be seen as ambiguous whether Francis or the asylum director are truly the insane one, or whether both are insane.      Likewise, the final shot of the film, with an iris that fades to a close-up on the asylum directors face, further creates doubt over whether the character is actually sane and trustworthy.   As Brockmann writes, "In the end, the film is not just about one unfortunate madman; it is about an entire world that is possibly out of balance".  Mike Budd notes that, during the scene in which asylum doctors restrain Francis, his movement closely mimics those when Dr. Caligari is restrained in a similar scene during the main story. Budd says this suggests a "dream logic of repetition" which throws further confusion on which perspective is reality. 

===Double life===
Duality is another common theme in Caligari. Dr. Caligari is portrayed in the main narrative as an insane tyrant, and in the frame story as a respected authority and director of a mental institution. As a result of this duality, the viewer cannot help but suspect a malevolent aspect of him at the conclusion of the film, even despite all evidence indicating he is a kind and caring man.  Even within the main narrative alone, Dr. Caligari lives a double life: holding a respectable position as the asylum director, but becoming a hypnotist and murderer at night.  Additionally, the character is actual a double of the "real" Caligari, an 18th-century mystic that the film character becomes so obsessed with that he desires to penetrate his innermost secrets and "become Caligari".    Francis also takes on a double life of sorts, serving as the heroic protagonist in the main narrative and a patient in a mental institution in the frame story. Anton Kaes described the story Francis tells as an act of transference with his psychiatrist, as well as a projection of his feelings that he is a victim under the spell of the all-powerful asylum director, just as Cesare is the hypnotized victim of Dr. Caligari.  The Cesare character serves as both a persecutor and a victim, as he is both a murderer and the unwilling slave of an oppressive master.  

Siegfried Kracauer said by coupling a fantasy in which Francis overthrows a tyrannical authority, with a reality in which authority triumphs over Francis, Caligari reflects a double aspect of German life, suggesting they reconsider their traditional belief in authority even as they embrace it.  A contrast between levels of reality exist not only in the characterizations, but in the presentation of some of the scenes as well.    This, as Barlow writes, "reveals a contrast between external calm and internal chaos".  For example, flashback scenes when Francis reads Dr. Caligaris diary, in which the doctor is shown growing obsessed with learning hypnotic powers, take place as Dr. Caligari is sleeping peacefully in the present. Another example is the fair, which on the surface appears to represent fun and escapism, but reveals a lurking sense of chaos and disaster in the form of Dr. Caligari and Cesare.  The visual elements of the film also convey a sense of duality, particularly in the contrasts between black and white. This is particularly prevalent in the sets, where black shadows are set against white walls, but also in other elements like the costumes and make-up. For instance, Dr. Caligari wears mostly black, but white streaks are present in his hair and on his gloves. Cesares face is a ghostly white, but the darks of his eyes are heavily outlined in black. Likewise, Janes white face contrasts with her deep, dark eyes. 

===Reflection on post-war Germany===
Critics have suggested Caligari highlights some of the neuroses prevalent in the Germany and the Weimar Republic when the film was made,     particularly in the shadow of World War I,  at a time when extremism was rampant, reactionaries still controlled German institutions, and citizens fears the negative impact the Treaty of Versailles would have on the economy.  Siegfried Kracauer wrote that the paranoia and fear portrayed in the film was a sign of things to come in Germany,   and that the film reflected a German tendency to "retreat into themselves" and away from political engagement following the war.   Vincent LoBrutto wrote that the film can be seen as a social or political analogy of "the moral and physical breakdown of Germany at the time, with a madman on the loose wreaking havoc on a distorted and off-balanced society, a metaphor for a country in chaos". 

Anton Kaes, who called Caligari "an aggressive statement about war psychiatry, murder and deception", wrote that Alans question to Cesare, "How long have I to live?" reflected the trauma German citizens experienced during the war, as that question was often on the minds of soldiers in the war, and family members back home concerned about their loved ones in the military. Francis despair after Alans murder can likewise be compared to the many soldiers who survived the war, but saw their friends die on the battlefield. Kaes noted other parallels between the film and war experiences, noting that Cesare attacked Alan at dawn, a common time for attacks during the war.  Thomas Elsaesser called Caligari an "outstanding example of how fantastic representations in German films from the early 1920s seem to bear the imprint of pressures from eternal events, to which they refer only through the violence with which they disguise and disfigure them." 

==Release==
 ) was revealed.]]
Though often considered an art film by modern audiences, Caligari was produced and marketed the same as a normal commercial production of its time period, able to target both the elite artistic market as well as a more commercial horror genre audience.       The film was marketed extensively leading up to the release, and advertisements ran even before the film was finished. Many posters and newspaper advertisements included the enigmatic phrase featured in the film, "Du musst Caligari werden!", or "You must become Caligari!"       Caligari premiered at the   theater in Berlin on 26 February 1920, less than one month after it was completed.  The filmmakers were so nervous about the release that Erich Pommer, on his way to the theater, reportedly exclaimed, "It will be a horrible failure for all of us!"     As with the making of the film, several urban legends surround the films premiere.  One, offered by writers Roger Manvell and Heinrich Fraenkel in The German Cinema, suggest the film was shelved "for lack of a suitable outlet", and was only shown at Marmorhaus because another film had fallen through.  Another suggested the theater pulled the film after only two performances because audiences demanded refunds and demonstrated against it so strongly. This story was told by Pommer, who claimed the Marmorhaus picked Caligari back up and ran it successfully for three months after he spent six months working on a publicity campaign for the film. David Robinson wrote that neither of these urban legends were true, and that the latter was fabricated by Pommer to increase his own reputation.  On the contrary, Robinson said the premiere was highly successful, showing at the theater for four weeks, an unusual amount for the time, and then returning two weeks later. He said it was so well received that women in the audience screamed when Cesare opened his eyes during his first scene, and fainted during the scene when Cesare abducted Jane.  
 Goldwyn Distributing Capitol Theatre on 3 April 1921.  It was given a live theatrical prologue and epilogue,     which was not unusual for film premieres at major theaters at the time. In the prologue, the film is introduced by a character called "Cranford", who identifies himself as the man Francis speaks with in the opening scene. In the epilogue, Cranford returns and exclaims that Francis has fully recovered from his madness.  Mike Budd believes these additions simplified the film and "adjusted   for mass consumption",  though Robinson argued it was simply a normal theatrical novelty for the time.    Capitol Theatre runner Samuel Roxy Rothafel commissioned conductor Ernö Rapée to compile a musical accompaniment that included portions of songs by composers Johann Strauss III, Arnold Schoenberg, Claude Debussy, Igor Stravinsky and Sergei Prokofiev. Rotafel wanted the score to match the dark mood of the film, saying: "The music had, as it were, to be made eligible for citizenship in a nightmare country". 

Caligari had its Los Angeles premiere at Millers Theater on 7 May 1921, but the theater was forced to pull it due to demonstrations by protestors. However, the protest was organized by the Hollywood branch of the American Legion due to fears of unemployment stemming from the import of German films into America, not over objections to the content of Caligari itself.    After running in large commercial theaters, Caligari began to be shown in smaller theaters and film societies in major cities.  Box office figures were not regularly published in the 1920s, so it has been difficult to assess the commercial success or failure of Caligari in the United States. Film historians Kristin Thompson and David B. Pratt separately studied trade publications from the time in an attempt to make a determination, but reached conflicting findings; with Thompson concluded it was a box office success and Pratt concluded it was a failure. However, both agreed it was more commercially successful in major cities than in theaters in smaller communities, where tastes were considered more conservative.   

Caligari did not immediately receive a wide distribution in France due to fears over the import of German films, but film director Louis Delluc organized a single screening of it on 14 November 1921, at the Colisée cinema in Paris as part of a benefit performance for the Spanish Red Cross. Afterward, the Cosmograph company bought the films distribution rights and premiered it at the Ciné-Opéra on 2 March 1922.  Caligari played in one Paris theater for seven consecutive years, a record that remained intact until the release of Emmanuelle (film)|Emmanuelle (1974).  According to Janowitz, Caligari was also shown in such European cities as London, Rome, Amsterdam, Stockholm, Brussels, Prague, Vienna, Budapest and Bucharest, as well as other countries like China, Japan, India, Turkey and South American nations. 

==Reception==

===Critical response===
 
There are differing accounts as to how Caligari was first received by audiences and critics immediately after its release. Stephen Brockmann, Anton Kaes and film theorist Kristin Thompson say it was popular with both the general public and well-respected by critics.      Robinson wrote, "The German critics, almost without exception, ranged from favourable to ecstatic".  Kracauer said critics were "unanimous in praising Caligari as the first work of art on the screen",  but also said it was "too high-brow to become popular in Germany".    Barlow said it was often the subject of critical disapproval, which he believes is because early film reviewers attempted to assign fixed definitions to the young art of cinema, and thus had trouble accepting the bizarre and unusual elements of Caligari.  Some critics felt it imitated a stage production too closely.  Other commentators, like critic Herbert Jhering and novelist Blaise Cendrars, objected to the presentation of the story as a madmans delusion because they felt it belittled Expressionism as an artform.  Theater critic Helmut Grosse condemned the films visual design as clichéd and derivative, calling it a "cartoon and (a) reproduction of designs rather than from what actually took place on stage".  Several reviewers, like Kurt Tucholsky and Blaise Cendrars, criticized the use of real actors in front of artificially-painted sets, saying it created an inconsistent level of stylization. Critic Herbert Ihering echoed this point in a 1920 review: "If actors are acting without energy and are playing within landscapes and rooms which are formally excessive, the continuity of the principle is missing". 
 New York modernist art, National Board of Review of Motion Pictures, said it "occupies the position of unique artistic merit", and said American films in comparison looked like they were made for "a group of defective adults at the nine-year-old level". 

Caligari was a critical success in France, but French filmmakers were divided in their opinions after its release.  , however, called it "a prize example of the abuse of décor in the cinema" and said it "represents a grave sickness of cinema".  Likewise,   especially disliked Caligari, calling it a "combination of silent hysteria, particoloured canvases, daubed flats, painted faces, and the unnatural broken gestures and action of monstrous chimaeras".   

While early reviews were more divided, modern film critics and historians have largely praised Caligari as a revolutionary film. Film reviewer   in 1958, in which 120 international film critics participated.      |date=30 April 2013 |url=http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/04/30/rotten-tomatoes-highest-rated-movies-_n_3187897.html |accessdate=10 March 2015 |archiveurl=http://www.webcitation.org/6WvSUlYE6
 |archivedate=10 March 2015}} 

===Legacy===
Caligari is considered the quintessential work of German Expressionist cinema, and by far the most famous and well-regarded example of it.           It is considered a classic film, often shown in introductory film courses, film societies and museums,  and is one of the most famous German films from the silent era.  Film scholar Lewis Jacobs called it "most widely-discussed film of the time".  Caligari helped draw worldwide attention to the artistic merit of German cinema,    while also bringing legitimacy to the cinema among literary intellectuals within Germany itself.  Lotte Eisner has said it was in Expressionism, as epitomized in Caligari, that "the German cinema found its true nature."  The term "caligarism" was coined as a result, referring to a style of similar films that focus on such themes as bizarre madness and obsession, particularly through the use of visual distortion.  Expressionism was late in coming to cinema, and by the time Caligari was released, many German critics felt the art form had become commercialized and trivialized;       such well-known writers as Kasimir Edschmid, René Schickele, and Yvan Goll had already pronounced the Expressionist movement dead by the time Caligari arrived in theaters.  Few other purely Expressionistic films were produced, and Caligari was the only one readily accessible for several decades.     Among the few films to fully embrace the Expressionist style were  Genuine (film)|Genuine (1920) and Raskolnikow (film)|Raskolnikow (1923), both directed by Wiene, as well as From Morn to Midnight (1920), Torgus (1921), Das Haus zum Mond (1921), Haus ohne Tür und ohne Fenster (1921) and Waxworks (film)|Waxworks.    

While few other purely Expressionistic films were made, Caligari still had a major influence over other German directors,    and many of the films Expressionist elements – particularly the use of setting, lighting shadow and shadow to represent the dark psychology of its characters – became prevalent in German cinema.   Among the films to use these elements were Murnaus Nosferatu (1922) and The Last Laugh (1924),      G. W. Pabsts Secrets of a Soul (1926),  and Langs Metropolis (1927 film)|Metropolis (1927) and M (1931 film)|M (1931).   The success of Caligari also effected the way in which German films were produced during the 1920s. For example, the majority of major German films over the next few years moved away from location shooting and were fully filmed in studios,   which assigned much more importance to designers in German cinema.  Robinson argues this led to the rise of a large amount of film designers – such as Hans Dreier, Rochus Gliese, Albin Grau, Otto Hunte Alfred Junge, Erich Kettelhut and Paul Leni – and that impact was felt abroad as many of these talents later emigrated from Germany with the rise of the Nazi Party.  Additionally, the success of Caligari  s collaborative effort – including its director, set designers and actors – influenced subsequent film production in Germany for many years, making teamwork a hallmark of German cinema in the Weimar Republic. 

The impact of Caligari was felt not just in German cinema, but internationally as well.    Both Rotha and film historian William Everson wrote that the film probably had as much of a long-term effect on Hollywood directors as   (1928).  LoBrutto wrote, "Few films throughout motion picture history have had more influence on the avant-garde, art, and student cinema than Caligari". 
 The Overcoat.  Observers have noted the black and white films of Ingmar Bergman bear a resemblance to the German films of the 1920s, and film historian Roy Armes has called him as "the true heir of Caligari". Bergman himself, however, has downplayed the influence of German Expressionism on his work.  Caligari has also had an impact on stage theater. Siegfried Kracauer wrote that the films use of the iris-in has been mimicked in theatrical productions, with lighting used to single out a lone actor. 
 Themes section Writing for more.) Eisners book placed Caligari into a historical context by identifying how it influenced Expressionist features in other 1920s films.  

Film historian David Robinson claimed Wiene, despite being the director of Caligari, is often given the least amount of credit for its production.  He believes this is in part because Wiene died in 1938, closer to the release of the film than any other major collaborators, and was therefore unable to defend his involvement in the work while others took credit.  In fact, Robinson argues Caligari ultimately hurt Wienes reputation because his subsequent films did not match its success, so he is often wrongly considered "a one-film director who had a lucky fluke with Caligari". 

==Sequels, remakes and musical works== surrealist style.  In 1944, Erich Pommer and Hans Janowitz each separately attempted to obtain the legal rights of the film, with hopes of making Hollywood remake.     Pommer attempted to argue he had a better claim to the rights because the primary value of the original film came not from the writing, but "in the revolutionary way the picture was produced".  However, both Janowitz and Pommer ran into complications related to the invalidity of Nazi law in the United States, and uncertainty over the legal rights of sound and silent films.   Janowitz wrote a treatment for a remake, and in January 1945 was offered a minimum guarantee of $16,000 against five percent royalties for his rights to the original film for a sequel to be directed by Fritz Lang, but the project never came to fruition.     Later, Janowitz planned a sequel called Caligari II, and unsuccessfully attempted to sell the property to a Hollywood producer for $30,000. 
 Bill Nelson was asked by the Yorkshire Actors Company to create a soundtrack for a stage adaptation of the film. That music was later recorded for his 1982 album Das Kabinet (The Cabinet Of Doctor Caligari). 
 independent film green screen, matte shots Doug Jones played the role of Cesare.   
 John Moran. It premiered at the American Repertory Theater in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in a production by Robert McGrath.  Numerous musicians have composed new musical scores to accompany the film. The Club Foot Orchestra premiered a score penned by ensemble founder and artistic director Richard Marriott in 1987.  In 2000, the Israeli Electronica group TaaPet made several live performances of their soundtrack for the film around Israel.  In 2014, Bertelsmann/BMG commissioned Timothy Brock to adapt his 1996 score for string orchestra for the new 2014 restoration, who conducted the premiere in Brussels on September 15, 2014.  In 2012, the Chatterbox Audio Theatre recorded a live soundtrack, including dialogue, sound effects and music for Caligari, which was released on YouTube on October 30, 2013. 

==References==

===Footnotes===
 

===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
*  }}
*  }}
* 
* 
*  }}
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* }}
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
 
*   - A philosophical analysis of the Cabinet of Dr Caligari, by Siegfried Kracauer.
*  
*  
*  
*  

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 