Scarface (1983 film)
 
{{Infobox film
| name           = Scarface
| image          = Scarface.jpg
| caption        = Theatrical release poster
| director       = Brian De Palma
| producer       = Martin Bregman
| screenplay     = Oliver Stone
| starring = {{Plainlist|
* Al Pacino
}}
 
| music          = Giorgio Moroder
| cinematography = John A. Alonzo
| editing        = {{Plain list| Jerry Greenberg
* David Ray
}}
| distributor    = Universal Pictures
| released       =  
| runtime        = 170&nbsp;minutes
| country        = United States
| language       = English
| budget         = $25 million   
| gross          = $65.9 million   
}} crime drama 1932 film of the same name, Scarface tells the story of Cuban refugee Tony Montana (Al Pacino) who arrives in 1980s Miami with nothing, and rises to become a powerful drug kingpin. The film also features Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, Steven Bauer, and Michelle Pfeiffer.
 mob film genre and has resulted in many cultural references such as in comic books and video games.

== Plot ==
  green cards. Franks henchman Omar Suarez (F. Murray Abraham) gives the group the opportunity to purchase cocaine from Colombian dealers, but the deal collapses. Angel is dismembered with a chainsaw, while Manny and Chi-Chi rescue Tony and kill the Colombians. Suspecting that Omar betrayed them, Tony and Manny insist on personally delivering the recovered drugs and money to Frank. Impressed, Frank hires Tony and Manny. During their meeting, Tony meets, and is instantly attracted to Franks girlfriend Elvira Hancock (Michelle Pfeiffer). Months later, Tony visits his mother Georgina (Míriam Colón), and younger sister Gina (Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio), of whom he is fiercely protective. His mother is disgusted by his life of crime and throws him out. As Tony gets in his waiting car, Manny comments on Ginas beauty before being warned by Tony to stay away from her.

Frank sends Tony and Omar to Bolivia to meet with cocaine kingpin Alejandro Sosa (Paul Shenar). Tony negotiates a deal with Sosa without Franks approval, and Omar leaves to contact Frank. Sosa claims that Omar is a police informant and then has Tony witness as a beaten Omar is pushed to his death from a helicopter. Tony vouches for Franks organization, and Sosa agrees to the deal, parting with a warning that Tony should never betray him. In Miami, Frank is infuriated by Omars demise and the unauthorized deal struck by Tony. As a result, Tonys and Franks relationship dissolves, resulting in Tony establishing his own organization and informing Elvira of his intentions toward her.

At a nightclub, corrupt detective Mel Bernstein (Harris Yulin) attempts to extort money from Tony in return for police protection and information. Tony angers Frank further by openly pursuing Elvira in the club. When Tony sees Gina dancing and being touched by a man, he argues with, and hits Gina before Manny takes her home. Hitmen then attempt to assassinate Tony, but he escapes the club. Suspecting that his former boss sent both Bernstein and the hitmen, Tony, Manny and Chi-Chi go to Franks office, where they find him with Bernstein. Frank confesses to his involvement and begs for his life, but the group kills both him and Bernstein.

Tony marries Elvira and, with Sosas supplies, he builds a multi-million-dollar empire. By 1983, the operation gradually struggles as Tony becomes increasingly paranoid, he and Elvira excessively use cocaine, his money launderer demands a larger percentage for his banks services, and Manny grows resentful as Tony takes all credit for their success. Eventually, Tony is charged with money laundering and tax evasion after a police investigation. Sosa offers to use his government connections to keep Tony out of jail if Tony assassinates a journalist intending to expose Sosa. Later, Tony pushes Manny and Elvira further away by blaming his friend for his arrest and accusing his wife of being infertile because of her drug use. As a result, Elvira leaves Tony.

In New York City, Tony, Chi-Chi and Sosas henchman Alberto (Mark Margolis) prepare for the assassination. Alberto plants a bomb on the journalists car, but when he is unexpectedly accompanied by his wife and children, Tony calls off the mission. Alberto insists on continuing, and Tony becomes enraged and kills him. Returning home, Tony is contacted by Sosa who is furious about Tonys failure. Sosa ends their partnership and warns Tony that he should not have betrayed him.

Later, Tony learns that Manny and Gina have been missing for several days. His search leads him to a house where he finds Manny. When Tony also sees Gina wearing only a robe, he kills Manny. Gina tells Tony that she and Manny had just gotten married the day before and were planning to surprise him. Tony returns to his mansion with Gina, where he displays remorse for Mannys death before burying his face in a large mound of cocaine. Meanwhile, Sosas men begin assaulting the mansion and killing Tonys men, including Chi-Chi. A drugged Gina accuses Tony of wanting her himself and shoots him in the leg, before one of Sosas men shoots and kills her. Tony kills the man and becomes distraught at the sight of Ginas corpse. In a cocaine-fueled fury, Tony uses a grenade-launcher-equipped M-16 to attack Sosas hitmen. Despite taking out many of the attackers, Tony is repeatedly shot until he is finished off by a shotgun to his back. His body falls into a fountain below, in front of a statue reading, "The World is Yours."
 

==Cast==
  was an unknown actress when she appeared in Scarface, and both star Al Pacino and director Brian De Palma argued against her casting. ]]
* Al Pacino as Tony Montana: A Cuban immigrant turned drug lord
* Steven Bauer as Manny Ribera: Tonys right-hand man and best friend
* Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio as Gina Montana: Tonys sister
* Michelle Pfeiffer as Elvira Hancock: Tonys drug-addicted trophy wife
* Paul Shenar as Alejandro Sosa: A powerful international drug lord
* Robert Loggia as Frank Lopez: A Miami drug lord who initially employs Tony
* Míriam Colón as Georgina Montana: Tonys and Ginas mother, credited as Mama Montana.
* F. Murray Abraham as Omar Suárez: Franks right-hand man
* Harris Yulin as Mel Bernstein: A corrupt police officer


The cast also includes: Ángel Salazar as Chi-Chi, and Pepe Serna as Angel Fernandez, Tonys associates; Arnaldo Santana as Ernie, Franks henchman; Michael P. Moran as Nick the Pig, Al Israel as Hector the Toad, Mark Margolis as Alberto the Shadow, and Geno Silva as The Skull, Sosas henchmen; Dennis Holahan as Jerry, Tonys banker and money launderer; Michael Alldredge as George Sheffield; Ted Beniades as Seidelbaum; and Richard Belzer as the comic at the Babylon Club.

==Development==
  in 2010. He wrote the script for Scarface while struggling with his own addiction to cocaine.]]

Scarface began development after Pacino saw the 1932 film of the same name at the Tiffany Theater while in Los Angeles. He later called his manager, producer Martin Bregman and informed him of his belief in the potential for a remake of that film.  Pacino originally wanted to retain the period piece aspect, but realized that because of its melodramatic nature it would be difficult to accomplish.  Sidney Lumet became attached as the director, developing the idea for Montana to be Cuban arriving in America during the Mariel boatlift.  

Bregman and Lumets creative differences saw Lumet drop out of the project. Lumet had wanted to make a more political story that focused on blaming the current Presidential administration for the influx of cocaine into the United States, and Bregman disagreed with Lumets views.   Bregman replaced him with Brian De Palma, and hired writer Oliver Stone, later stating that it took only four phone calls to secure their involvement.  Stone researched the script while battling his own cocaine addiction.  He and Bregman performed their own research, travelling to Miami, Florida where they were given access to records from the U.S. Attorneys Office and the Organized Crime Bureau.  Stone moved to Paris to write the script, believing he could not break his addiction while in America, stating in a 2003 interview that he was completely off drugs at the time "because I dont think cocaine helps writing. Its very destructive to the brain cells."   Although Pacino insisted he take the lead role as Tony Montana, Robert De Niro was offered and turned down the role.   Pacino worked with experts in knife combat, trainers, and boxer Roberto Duran to attain the body type he wanted for the role. Duran also helped inspire the character, whom Pacino thought had "a certain lion in him", and the work of Meryl Streep on Sophies Choice (film)|Sophies Choice (1982), where she also played an immigrant character. Bauer and a dialect coach helped him learn aspects of the Cuban Spanish language and pronunciation. 

Pfeiffer was an unknown actress at the time, and both Pacino and De Palma had argued against her casting, but Bregman fought for her inclusion.  Glenn Close was the original choice for the role, while others including Geena Davis, Carrie Fisher, Kelly McGillis, Sharon Stone, and Sigourney Weaver were also considered.  Bauer however got his role without even auditioning. During the audition process, casting director Alixe Gordin saw Bauer and instantly noted that he was right for the role of Manny, a judgment both De Palma and Bregman agreed with; he was the only actual Cuban in the principal cast. John Travolta was considered for the role.   

During rehearsals for a gunfight, Pacino was injured after he grabbed the barrel of a prop gun which had just been used to fire several dummy bullets. His hand stuck to the hot barrel and he was unable to remove it immediately; the injury sidelined him for 2 weeks. The gunfight scene also includes a single shot directed by Steven Spielberg who was visiting the set at the time.  During filming, some Cuban-Americans objected to the films Cuban-American characters being portrayed as criminals by non-Cuban-American actors. To counter this, the film features a disclaimer during its credits stating that the film characters were not representative of the Cuban-American community.  The entertainment industry initially hated the film, with actress Liza Minnelli—who at the time had not seen the film—asking Pacino what he had done to leave the insiders subdued at a post-screening meal. However, during the meal, actor Eddie Murphy told Pacino he loved the film. 

Despite its Miami setting, much of the film was actually shot in Los Angeles as the Miami Tourist board was afraid that the films depiction of the state, as a haven for drugs and gangsters, would deter tourism.  Tonys opulent Miami mansion was portrayed by El Fureidis, a Roman-styled mansion in Santa Barbara, California. 

Scarface was given an X rating in North America three times for extreme violence, frequent strong language and hard drug usage. The restrictive rating, more associated at the time with pornography, both limited the number of cinemas willing to screen such a film, and restricted promotional advertising, which would potentially adversely affect any box office takings. In particular, an early scene where Montanas associate Angel is dismembered with a chainsaw off screen, was singled out as the cause of the X rating. De Palma made edits to the scene and resubmitted it to the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA), but was again given an X rating. He made further edits and resubmitted it between 3 to 5 times before refusing to further edit the film, telling Universal Pictures to either release it in its current form or fire and replace him with someone who would edit it. Universal opted to appeal the MPAAs decision. Then-studio president Robert Rehme attended the hearing which was presided over by his friend, and MPAA President Jack Valenti. Among those speaking on behalf of the film during the appeal were film critic Roger Ebert, the head of Floridas Broward County organized crime division, and the head of a major theater chain, Alan Friedberg. MPAA member Richard Heffner would later admit that he could have fought harder to retain the X rating, but he believed that Valenti did not support the decision, as he did not want to alienate the big film studios. The decision was overwhelmingly in favor of releasing the film with a less restrictive R rating.

In response, De Palma argued that if the latest version of the film was now considered an R, then his original version would also be one, rationalizing that the edits he made were minor. The MPAA told De Palma that only his latest edit would be certified as an R. De Palma however believed that the changes were so slight that no one would notice if he released his original version anyway, which he ultimately did.  

==Release==
Scarface premiered on December 1, 1983 in New York City, where it was initially greeted with mixed to positive reaction. The films two stars, Al Pacino and Steven Bauer, were joined in attendance by Burt and Diane Lane, Melanie Griffith, Raquel Welch, Joan Collins, her then-boyfriend Peter Holm and Eddie Murphy among others.  The limited, 20th anniversary theatrical re-release in 2003 boasted a remastered soundtrack with enhanced sound effects and music.

===Reception===
The initial release of Scarface was met with a negative critical response,  and drew controversy regarding the violence and graphic language in the film.    The New York Magazine defined it empty, bullying and overblown B movie.   

According to   loved it, Lucille Ball, who came with her family, hated it because of the graphic violence and profanity|language, and Dustin Hoffman was said to have fallen asleep . Writers Kurt Vonnegut and John Irving were among those who allegedly walked out in disgust after the notorious chainsaw scene . At the middle of the film, Martin Scorsese turned to Steven Bauer and told him, "You guys are great – but be prepared, because theyre going to hate it in Hollywood... because its about them." 

Roger Ebert rated it four stars out of four in his 1983 review and he later added it to his "Great Movies" list.  Ebert wrote "DePalma and his writer, Oliver Stone, have created a gallery of specific individuals, and one of the fascinations of the movie is that we arent watching crime-movie clichés, were watching people who are criminals."    Vincent Canby praised the film in the New York Times: "The dominant mood of the film is... bleak and futile: what goes up must always come down. When it comes down in Scarface, the crash is as terrifying as it is vivid and arresting."   
 annual movie guide, Maltin included an addendum to his review stating his surprise with the films newfound popularity as a cult-classic.   

In his review for Newsweek, David Ansen wrote, "If Scarface makes you shudder, its from what you think you see and from the accumulated tension of this feral landscape. Its a grand, shallow, decadent entertainment, which like all good Hollywood gangster movies delivers the punch and counterpunch of glamour and disgust".    Jay Scott, in his review for the Globe and Mail, writes, "For a while, Al Pacino is hypnotic as Montana. But the effort expended on the flawless Cuban accent and the attempts to flesh out a character cut from inch-thick cardboard are hopeless."    In his review for the Washington Post, Gary Arnold wrote, "A movie that appeared intent on revealing an alarmingly contemporary criminal subculture gradually reverts to underworld cliche, covering its derivative tracks with outrageous decor and an apocalyptic, production number finale, ingeniously choreographed to leave the antihero floating face down in a literal bloodbath."   

Review aggregation website   gives it an average score of 65/100.
 Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Motion Picture – Drama and Steven Bauer was nominated for Best Supporting Actor as well. DePalma was nominated for, but did not win, a Razzie Award for Worst Director.

===Box office=== 16th highest grossing film of 1983, and seventh highest grossing R-rated film in North America for 1983.  

===Home media===
Scarface was initially released by   ratio – and quickly became a bestseller, preluding its cult status.  A 2.35:1 Widescreen VHS would follow years later in 1998 to coincide with the special edition DVD release. The last VHS release was in 2003 to counterpart the 20th anniversary edition DVD.

The TV version of Scarface premiered on ABC on January 7, 1989.  32&nbsp;minutes of violence, profanity and sex were edited out, and much of the dialog, including the constant use of the word "fuck", which was muted after the beginning of "f-" or replaced with less offensive alternatives. 

The film received a North American DVD release on the films 15th anniversary in 1998 featuring a non-anamorphic widescreen transfer, a "Making of" documentary, outtakes, production notes and cast and crew biographies. This release was not successful, and many fans and reviewers complained about its unwatchable video transfer and muddled sound, describing it as "one of the worst big studio releases out there".  In 2003, a 20th anniversary re-release, featured two documentaries&nbsp;— including a new interview with Steven Bauer and another produced by Def Jam Recordings featuring interviews with various rappers on the films cult status in the hip hop world. 

Scarface was released on Blu-ray disc on September 6, 2011 in a two-disc, limited edition, steelbox package.  The set contains a remastered, 1080p widescreen transfer of the film in 7.1 DTS-HD Master Audio surround sound, as well as a digital copy. Disc two is a DVD of the 1932 Scarface, featuring a The Movie Channel|TMC-produced introduction by Robert Osborne and an alternate ending. Bonus features include The Making of Scarface documentary, and a new retrospective documentary: The Scarface Phenomenon. 

A special gift set, limited to 1,000 copies, features the Blu-ray set housed in a cigar humidor, designed by world-renowned humidor craftsman Daniel Marshall. The humidor box set retailed at $999.99. 

Universal also launched a "National Fan Art Contest" via Facebook. The top 25 submissions selected by Universal were entered in a poll where fans voted on their 10 favorite works to be featured as art cards in the Blu-ray set. The Grand-Prize winner had their artwork featured on a billboard in a major US city in order to promote the release. To celebrate the release of Scarface on Blu-ray, Universal Studios and Fathom Events teamed up to make a Scarface Special Event. The event included Scarface coming back to select theaters nationwide for one night only on Wednesday, August 31, 2011. A twenty-minute documentary on how the film impacted the world today also featured.

==Music==
  synthesized New new wave, electronic music. De Palma says that he has repeatedly denied Universals requests to release the film with a "rap score" because he feels Moroders score is already perfect. 

==Legacy== 226 times in total.  The company set up by former Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein to launder money was named Montana Management after Pacinos character. 
 high profile feud with Jay-Z, Nas, on his track "Last Real Nigga Alive" from his album Gods Son, compared himself to Tony Montana, and Jay-Z to Manny respectively from Scarface. 

In 2010, artist James Georgopoulos included the screen-used guns from Scarface in his popular Guns of Cinema series.   

 .   IDW publishing released a limited series called Scarface: Scarred For Life. It starts with corrupt police officers finding Tony has survived the final mansion showdown. Similar to the game The World Is Yours, Tony works at rebuilding his criminal empire. 

In 2001, plans were made for hip hop artist  . Martin Bregman, who produced the 1983 remake, will produce this version,  with a screenplay by David Ayer  and David Yates in talks to direct the film.  On March 24, 2014, The Wrap has reported that Pablo Larraín is in negotiations to direct the film along with Paul Attanasio writing the films script. The films update will be an original story set in modern day Los Angeles that follows a Mexican immigrants rise in the criminal underworld as he strives for the American Dream.  Jonathan Herman was set in March 2015 to re-write the both drafts of the script of the film. 

Among other films, Scarface served as a major inspiration for the 2002 award-winning video game  , which took place in a representation of 1980s Miami and featured music from the films soundtrack, as well as a recreation of Montanas mansion.    Scarface would get its own direct tie-in with the 2006 video games   and  .

== See also ==
 

==References==
{{Reflist|colwidth=30em|refs=

   

   

   

   

   

   

   

   

 
*  
*  
*  
*  
 

   

   

   

   

   

   

   

   

   

   

   

 
*  
*  
 

}}

==Bibliography==
*  |isbn=0786419296 |oclc=55738228 |url=http://books.google.com/books?id=40UTI-uUHpwC}}
*  

==External links==
 
 
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 