The Hours (film)
 The Hours}}
 
{{Infobox film
| name = The Hours
| image = The_Hours_poster.jpg
| alt = 
| caption = Theatrical release poster
| director = Stephen Daldry Robert Fox David Hare
| based on =  
| starring = Meryl Streep Julianne Moore Nicole Kidman Ed Harris Toni Collette Claire Danes Jeff Daniels Stephen Dillane Allison Janney John C. Reilly Miranda Richardson
| music = Philip Glass
| cinematography = Seamus McGarvey Peter Boyle Scott Rudin Productions
| distributor = Paramount Pictures
| released =  
| runtime = 114 minutes  
| country = United Kingdom United States
| language = English
| budget = $25 million
| gross = $108,846,072
}} David Hare novel of the same title.

The plot focuses on three women of different generations whose lives are interconnected by the novel Mrs Dalloway by Virginia Woolf. These are Clarissa Vaughan (Streep), a New Yorker preparing an award party for her AIDS-stricken long-time friend and poet, Richard (Harris) in 2001; Laura Brown (Moore), a pregnant 1950s California housewife with a young boy and an unhappy marriage; and Virginia Woolf (Kidman) herself  in 1920s England, who is struggling with depression and mental illness while trying to write her novel.
 Best Picture, Best Actress.

==Plot== River Ouse, Richmond outside New Yorker Clarissa Vaughan is the embodiment of the novels title character, as she spends the day preparing for a party she is hosting in honor of her former lover and friend Richard, a poet and author living with AIDS who is to receive a major literary award.  Richard tells Clarissa he has stayed alive for her sake, and the award is meaningless because he didnt get it sooner, until he was on the brink of death.  She tells him she believes he would have won the award regardless of his illness.  Richard often refers to Clarissa as "Mrs. Dalloway" - her namesake - because she distracts herself from her own life the way the Woolf character does.
 Vanessa and her children. After their departure, Virginia flees to the railway station, where she is awaiting a train to central London, when Leonard arrives to bring her home. He tells her how he lives in constant fear that she will take her own life. She says she fears it also but argues that if she is to live, she has the right to decide how and where.
 tract home with her young son, Richie. She married her husband, Dan, soon after World War II. On the surface they are living the American Dream, but she is nonetheless deeply unhappy. She and Richie make a cake for Dans birthday, but it is a disaster. Her neighbor Kitty drops in to ask her if she can feed her dog while shes in the hospital for a procedure. Kitty pretends to be upbeat, but Laura senses her fear and boldly kisses her on the lips; Kitty laughs it off as if it didnt happen. Laura and Richie successfully make another cake and clean up, and then she takes Richie to stay with Mrs. Latch. Richie runs after his mother as she leaves, fearing that she will never come back. Laura checks into a hotel, where she intends to commit suicide. Laura removes several bottles of pills and Mrs. Dalloway from her purse and begins to read it. She drifts off to sleep and dreams the hotel room is flooded. She awakens with a change of heart and caresses her belly. She picks up Richie, and they return home to celebrate Dans birthday.

Clarissa appears equally worried about Richards depression and the party she is planning for him. Although Clarissa herself is bisexual and has been living with Sally Lester for 10 years, she and Richard were lovers during their college days. She meets with Richards ex-lover Louis Waters, who has returned for the festivities. Clarissas daughter, Julia, comes home to help her prepare. Richard has taken a combination of Xanax and Ritalin and tells Clarissa she is the most beautiful thing he ever had in life, before he commits suicide in front of her. Later that night, Laura, who is Richards mother, arrives at Clarissas apartment. It is clear that Lauras abandonment of her family was deeply traumatic for Richard, but Laura reveals it was a better decision for her to leave the family after the birth of her daughter rather than commit suicide. She has led an independent, happier life as a librarian in Canada. She does not apologize for the hurt she caused to her family (Dan and their daughter are also both dead) and suggests that its not possible to feel regret for something over which she had no choice. She acknowledges that no one will forgive her, but she offers an explanation: "It   was death. I chose life." When Julia visits Laura in her bedroom, she treats her with kindness and sensitivity that Laura does not expect to receive.

The film ends with a line from Virginias suicide note (in voice-over) in which she thanks Leonard for loving her: "Always the years between us. Always the years. Always the love. Always the hours."

==Cast==
 
 
;1923
* Nicole Kidman as Virginia Woolf
* Stephen Dillane as Leonard Woolf
* Miranda Richardson as Vanessa Bell
* Lyndsey Marshal as Lottie Hope
* Linda Bassett as Nelly Boxall
 
;1951
* Julianne Moore as Laura Brown
* John C. Reilly as Dan Brown
* Jack Rovello as Richie Brown
* Toni Collette as Kitty
* Margo Martindale as Mrs. Latch
 
;2001
* Meryl Streep as Clarissa Vaughan
* Ed Harris as Richard "Richie" Brown
* Allison Janney as Sally Lester
* Claire Danes as Julia Vaughan
* Jeff Daniels as Louis Waters
* Julianne Moore as Older Laura Brown
 

==Critical reception==
The Hours has an 81% "fresh" rating on the film review aggregator site Rotten Tomatoes, with 150 of 186 counted reviews giving it a positive review and an average rating of 7.4 out of 10 — with the consensus that "the movie may be a downer, but it packs an emotional wallop. Some fine acting on display here."  On Metacritic, the film holds an average score of 81 out of 100, based on 39 reviews.  The four main cast members were praised, especially Nicole Kidman who won numerous of awards for her portrayal of Virginia Woolf including the Academy Award for Best Actress.

Stephen Holden of The New York Times called the film "deeply moving" and "an amazingly faithful screen adaptation" and added, "Although suicide eventually tempts three of the films characters, The Hours is not an unduly morbid film. Clear eyed and austerely balanced would be a more accurate description, along with magnificently written and acted. Mr. Glasss surging minimalist score, with its air of cosmic abstraction, serves as ideal connective tissue for a film that breaks down temporal barriers." 

Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle observed, "Director Stephen Daldry employs the wonderful things cinema can do in order to realize aspects of The Hours that Cunningham could only hint at or approximate on the page. The result is something rare, especially considering how fine the novel is, a film thats fuller and deeper than the book ... Its marvelous to watch the ways in which   consistently dramatizes the original material without compromising its integrity or distorting its intent ... Cunninghams   touched on notes of longing, middle-aged angst and the sense of being a small consciousness in the midst of a grand mystery. But Daldry and Hares   sounds those notes and sends audiences out reverberating with them, exalted." 

Richard Schickel of Time (magazine)|Time criticized its simplistic characterization, saying, "Watching The Hours, one finds oneself focusing excessively on the unfortunate prosthetic nose Kidman affects in order to look more like the novelist. And wondering why the screenwriter, David Hare, and the director, Stephen Daldry, turn Woolf, a woman of incisive mind, into a hapless ditherer." He also criticized its overt politicization: "But this movie is in love with female victimization. Moores Laura is trapped in the suburban flatlands of the 50s, while Streeps Clarissa is moored in a hopeless love for Lauras homosexual son (Ed Harris, in a truly ugly performance), an AIDS sufferer whose relentless anger is directly traceable to Moms long-ago desertion of him. Somehow, despite the complexity of the films structure, this all seems too simple-minded. Or should we perhaps say agenda driven? The same criticisms might apply to the fact that both these fictional characters (and, it is hinted, Woolf herself) find what consolation they can in a rather dispassionate lesbianism. This ultimately proves insufficient to lend meaning to their lives or profundity to a grim and uninvolved film, for which Philip Glass unwittingly provides the perfect score — tuneless, oppressive, droning, painfully self-important." 

Peter Travers of Rolling Stone awarded the film, which he thought "sometimes stumbles on literary pretensions," three out of four stars. He praised the performances, commenting, "Kidmans acting is superlative, full of passion and feeling ... Moore is wrenching in her scenes with Lauras son (Jack Rovello, an exceptional child actor). And Streep is a miracle worker, building a character in the space between words and worlds. These three unimprovable actresses make The Hours a thing of beauty." 

Steve Persall of the St. Petersburg Times said it "is the most finely crafted film of the past year that I never want to sit through again. The performances are flawless, the screenplay is intelligently crafted, and the overall mood is relentlessly bleak. It is a film to be admired, not embraced, and certainly not to be enjoyed for any reason other than its expertise ... Glacially paced and somberly presented, The Hours demands that viewers be as impressed with the production as the filmmakers are with themselves ... Whatever the reason - too gloomy, too slow, too slanted -   is too highbrow and admirably dull for most moviegoers. Its the kind of film that makes critics feel smarter by recommending it, even at the risk of damaging credibility with mainstream audiences who automatically think any movie starring Kidman, Streep and Moore is worth viewing. The Hours will feel like days for them." 

Phillip French of The Observer called it "a moving, somewhat depressing film that demands and rewards attention." He thought "the performances are remarkable" but found the Philip Glass score to be "relentless" and "over-amplified." 
 My Left Foot. This is Nicole and her Big Fake Schnoz. It doesnt look anything like the real Virginias sharp, fastidious features . . . Julianne Moore gives   superbly controlled, humane performance . . . Streeps performance is probably the most fully realised of the three: a return to the kind of mature and demanding role on which she had a freehold in yesterdays Hollywood . . . Part of the bracing experimental impact of the film was the absence of narrative connection between the three women. Supplying one in the final reel undermines its formal daring, but certainly packs an emotional punch. It makes for an elegant and poignant chamber music of the soul." 

==Box office== Christmas Day 2002 and went into limited release in the United States and Canada two days later. It grossed $1,070,856 on eleven screens in its first two weeks of release. On January 10, 2003, it expanded to 45 screens, and the following week it expanded to 402. On February 14 it went into wide release, playing in 1,003 theaters in the US and Canada.    With an estimated budget of $25 million, the film eventually earned $41,675,994 in the US and Canada and $67,170,078 in foreign markets for a total worldwide box office of $108,846,072.
It was the 56th highest grossing film of 2002. 

==Soundtrack==
  soundtrack album was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack Album for a Motion Picture, Television or Other Visual Media.

==Additional awards and nominations==
 

==References==
 
* London Academy of Media, Film & TV, 

==External links==
 
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*   

{{Navboxes|list1=
 
 
 
 
}}

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 