Kiss Me, Stupid
{{Infobox film
| name          = Kiss Me, Stupid
| image         = KissMeStupidPoster.jpg
| image_size    =
| caption       = Original poster
| director      = Billy Wilder
| producer      = Billy Wilder
| writer        = Billy Wilder I.A.L. Diamond Based on a play by Anna Bonacci
| starring      = Dean Martin Kim Novak Ray Walston Felicia Farr Cliff Osmond
| distributor   = Lopert Pictures Corporation
| music         = André Previn
| cinematography= Joseph LaShelle
| editing       = Daniel Mandell
| released      =  
| runtime       = 126 minutes
| country       = United States
| language      = English
| gross         = $1,750,000  (rentals)  
}}
 1964 Cinema American comedy film directed by Billy Wilder and starring Dean Martin, Kim Novak, and Ray Walston.

The screenplay by Wilder and I.A.L. Diamond is based on the play LOra della Fantasia (The Dazzling Hour) by Anna Bonacci, which had inspired Wife For a Night (Moglie per una notte, 1952), an Italian film starring Gina Lollobrigida. The comic song lyrics were written by Ira Gershwin, using some of George Gershwins unpublished melodies.

==Plot== Las Vegas to Los Angeles, lecherous, heavy-drinking pop singer Dino (Dean Martin) is forced to detour through Climax, Nevada. There he meets the amateur songwriting team of Barney Millsap (Cliff Osmond), a gas station attendant, and piano teacher Orville J. Spooner (Ray Walston), a man easily given to jealousy. Hoping to interest Dino in their songs, Barney disables the "Italian" sports car and tells Dino he will need to remain in town until new parts arrive from Milan. (Dual-Ghia was actually an American Brand|marque, mating a Dodge frame, drivetrain, and engine with Italian coachwork.)

Orville invites Dino to stay with him and wife Zelda (Felicia Farr), but becomes concerned when he learns the singer needs to have sex every night to avoid awakening with a headache. Anxious to accommodate Dino but safeguard his marriage, Orville provokes an argument with his wife that leads to Zelda fleeing in tears. He and Barney then arrange for Polly the Pistol (Kim Novak), a waitress and prostitute at a saloon on the edge of town called the Belly Button, to pose as Orvilles wife and satisfy Dino.

That evening after the three have dinner, Orville plays his tunes for Dino on the piano and Polly requests a particular song. It is one she knows he wrote for his wife when trying to persuade her to marry him. Doing so, Orville gets lost in emotion, as does Polly, who has fallen a little for the dream of a domestic life that she doesnt have. Under the influence of wine and song, Orville starts thinking of Polly as his wife and tosses Dino out. He then spends the night with Polly.

Dino seeks shelter at the Belly Button, where Zelda earlier had gone to drown her sorrows. When she became drunk and rowdy, the manager deposited her in Pollys trailer to sleep. Hearing about the talents of Polly the Pistol and declaring himself eager "to shoot it out with her," Dino goes to the trailer and finds Zelda there and mistakes her for Polly. A longtime fan, she succumbs to Dinos charms and allows him to seduce her, persuading him how perfect Orvilles song would be for him at the same time.

Zelda meets Polly the next morning and figures out the trick Orville played on her. She gives Dinos money to Polly, who needs it to leave Climax and start a new life.

A few nights later, Orville is distraught knowing that Zelda intends to divorce him. Suddenly he hears Dino singing one of his songs on coast-to-coast television. He is at a total loss as to how this could have happened. He wants an explanation, but Zelda simply orders him: "Kiss me, stupid."

==Production== Cedars of Lebanon Hospital. Upon his release, the actor returned to England under doctors orders. Unwilling to wait while Sellers completed a six-month recuperation period, Wilder opted to replace him and reshoot all his scenes.   Turner Classic Movies. 

Marilyn Monroe was intended for the role of Polly the Pistol in preproduction in mid-1962. After her death, it was reported that Jayne Mansfield would step in as Monroes replacement. Monroe and Mansfield were noted rivals and Mansfield seemed to be the perfect choice to replace Monroe. Nevertheless, due to pregnancy, Mansfield had to decline the part and was replaced by fellow blonde Kim Novak. 

Wilder approached friend Ira Gershwin and asked if he would like to compose the songs written by Barney and Orville. Gershwin suggested he write lyrics to unpublished music by his late brother George Gershwin|George, and as a result three new songs by the Gershwins -- "Sophia," "Im a Poached Egg," and "All the Livelong Day" -- debuted in the film.  
 Aquarius Theatre and the Moulin Rouge Night Club in Los Angeles. The car that Martin drove was his own. 
 Catholic Legion of Decency strongly objected to the completed film. Wilder was willing to soften the suggestion Zelda had committed adultery with Dino, but he refused to comply with other demands, and the film was condemned, the first American film to be so designated since Baby Doll in 1956. As a direct result of the rating, United Artists decided to release the film under the banner of Lopert Pictures, a subsidiary previously used for imported films. 

Wilder rarely mentioned the film in later interviews, although he discussed it briefly for On Sunset Boulevard: The Life and Times of Billy Wilder, a biography by Ed Sikov. "I dont know why the film shocked people. Its the most bourgeois film there is," he declared. "A man wants a career and the person who wants to help him wants to sleep with his wife. He replaces his wife with another, but when he is nearest to success, he refuses it and throws the guy out . . . The public accepted it better in The Apartment because it was better conceived, better written, better lubricated."  

Wilder also discussed Kiss Me, Stupid in director Cameron Crowes 1998 book Conversations With Wilder, citing his admiration for Dean Martin, saying "there was much more, 90 percent more, to him than just the jokester. I am a sucker for Dean Martin. I thought he was the funniest man in Hollywood."

The movies use of an unflattering version of Dean Martin ("Dino") was a forerunner of the current trend of celebrities doing comic send-ups of themselves on film.

==Cast==
*Dean Martin ..... Dino
*Kim Novak ..... Polly the Pistol
*Ray Walston ..... Orville Spooner
*Felicia Farr ..... Zelda Spooner
*Cliff Osmond ..... Barney Millsap
*Barbara Pepper ..... Big Bertha
*Doro Merande ..... Mrs. Pettibone
*Howard McNear ..... Mr. Pettibone Tommy Nolan ..... Johnnie Mulligan
*Alice Pearce ..... Mrs. Mulligan
*John Fiedler ..... Reverend Carruthers
*Cliff Norton ..... Mack Gray

== Critical reception== The Carpetbaggers of the same year, the film was widely considered to be vulgar by critics. It became one of the targets for the negative impact of films on society. Bosley Crowther blamed both films for giving American movies the reputation of "deliberate and degenerate corruptors of public taster and morals".    A. H. Weiler of the New York Times called the film "pitifully unfunny" and "obvious, plodding, short on laughs and performances and long on vulgarity." He added, "The finesse, speed, artistry and imagination of . . . Some Like It Hot are sadly missing in this pungent exercise. Instead, we have cheapness that will not shock a grownup. However, this heavy-handed sex fable does call for a light, subtle approach that is rarely apparent."  

The Time (magazine)|Time review called the film "a jape that seems to have scraped its blue-black humor off the floor of a honky-tonk nightclub" and "professionally shrewd and zippy   a kind of vulgar integrity." It concluded, "The result, spelled out in dialogue that sounds like a series of gamy punch lines, is one of the longest traveling-salesman stories ever committed to film. Like all dirty jokes, it will probably evoke a shock wave of self-conscious laughter and pass swiftly into oblivion."  

Variety (magazine)|Variety said the script "calls for a generous seasoning of Noël Coward but, unfortunately, it provides a dash of same only now and again . . . Wilder, usually a director of considerable flair and inventiveness (if not always impeccable taste), has not been able this time out to rise above a basically vulgar, as well as creatively delinquent, screenplay, and he has got at best only plodding help from two of his principals, Dean Martin and Kim Novak . . .   has directed with frontal assault rather than suggestive finesse."  

Michael Scheinfeld of TV Guide rated the film 3½ out of four stars, calling it "a kind of cinematic litmus test that separates the casual Billy Wilder fan from the true connoisseur" and "a monument of satirical tastelessness that . . . in retrospect, is now seen as one of Wilders most fascinatingly original films." He added, "Amid the   furor, its easy to miss the films comedic accomplishments, which are considerable. Its idiomatic wordplay and social satire is vintage Wilder, and the opening sequence where Dino performs in a nightclub is one of the funniest things that Wilder has ever done. Sprinkling in bad jokes and Rat Pack references, Dean Martins comic timing and delivery is impeccable . . . The rest of the cast is equally superb, right down to the smallest bit part . . . although Ray Walstons relentless mugging becomes a bit much."   
 Ace in Seven Year Itch — but its ultimately a more knowingly tolerant, not to mention funnier, movie than either."  

==References==
 

==External links==
* 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 