Dementia 13
 
{{Infobox film
| name           = Dementia 13
| image          = Dementia.jpg
| image_size     = 215px
| alt            = 
| border         = yes
| caption        = A promotional film poster for Dementia 13
| director       = Francis Ford Coppola
| producer       = Roger Corman
| writer         = Francis Ford Coppola William Campbell Patrick Magee
| music          = Ronald Stein
| cinematography = Charles Hannawalt
| editing        = Stuart OBrien Morton Tubor
| distributor    = American International Pictures
| released       =  
| runtime        = 80 minutes   75 minutes  
| country        = United States
| language       = English
| budget         = $42,000 Fred Olen Ray, The New Poverty Row: Independent Filmmakers as Distributors, McFarland, 1991, p. 45 
}} thriller released William Campbell, Patrick Magee, heart attack death of her husband, attempts to have herself written into her rich mother-in-laws will (law)|will.  She pays a surprise visit to her late husbands family castle in Ireland, but her plans become permanently interrupted by an axe-wielding lunatic who begins to stalk and murderously hack away at members of the family.  
 gothic atmosphere and brutal killings, and Coppola quickly wrote a screenplay in accordance with Cormans requirements. Although he was given total directorial freedom during production, Coppola found himself fighting with Corman after the film was completed.  The producer declared the movie unreleasable and demanded several changes be made.  Corman eventually brought in another director, Jack Hill, to film additional sequences.  

==Plot== rowing in heart attack. Thinking quickly, the scheming Louise throws the fresh corpse over the side of the boat, where he comes to rest at the bottom of the lake. Her plan is to pretend that he is still alive, in order to ingratiate her way back into the will. She types up a letter to Lady Haloran, inviting herself to the familys Irish castle while her husband is "away on business". 

Upon arrival, she immediately notices that things are a little strange in the castle. She observes Johns two brothers, Billy and Richard taking part in a bizarre ceremony with their mother as part of a yearly ritualistic tribute to their youngest sister, Kathleen, who died many years before in a freak drowning accident. Lady Haloran still mourns for her, and during this years ceremony she faints dead away. As Louise helps her into the house, her mother-in-law tells her that she fainted because one of the flowers she had thrown had died as it touched Kathleens grave.  

Louise, realizing that Lady Haloran is emotionally overwrought and superstitious, devises a plan intended to convince the old woman that Kathleen is trying to communicate with her from beyond the grave. This plan involves stealing some of the dead girls old toys and placing them at the bottom of the estates pond where they will float to the surface in the middle of the day in an ostensibly ghostly way. At night, Louise swims into the pond and begins placing the toys as planned. However, she is shocked to see what appears to be Kathleens perfectly preserved corpse at the bottom of the pond. Horrified, she swims to the surface and is abruptly axed to death by an unknown assailant. The killer then drags Louises bloody corpse away.
 William Campbell as Richard Haloran]]
Concerned family doctor Justin Caleb arrives and becomes determined to solve the mystery. He questions the family in an intense, almost insane manner. Meanwhile, the murderer strikes again, decapitating a man who is poaching on the estate. Caleb has the pond drained, revealing a stone shrine for Kathleen, with the words "Forgive Me, Kathleen" on the monument. The following night, Lady Haloran is attacked by a shadowy figure, but she survives.

Finally, Caleb utilizes an obscure nursery rhyme ("Fishie, fishie, in a brook, Daddy caught you on a hook") recited by Billy under hypnosis to help him discover Louises corpse hidden in a meat freezer. Next to the body is a wax figure of Kathleen. Caleb places the figure in a public square to lure the killer. Taking the bait, a gibbering Billy attempts to kill Richards fiancée Kane with an axe; he has become insane with the guilt he has felt for years over having caused the death of his sister Kathleen. Caleb removes a gun from his coat pocket and shoots Billy to death.

==Cast== William Campbell as Richard Haloran. Dementia 13 was one of several Roger Corman productions the veteran B-movie character actor appeared in,  but it was the first that was completed on such a small budget.  Coppola had convinced Campbell, and his The Young Racers co-star Patrick Magee, to appear in the film.  The actor originally felt it would turn out to be a strictly "amateur endeavor", but he soon became impressed by Coppola’s leadership abilities, talent, and energy on the set.  Campbell recalled years later, "There were all kinds of promises as to what he   would do for me later. It was one of those I-owe-you-one things, but he never did anything! I tried to get to him when he was doing The Godfather, thinking that a cop or gangster part might be good for about 17 weeks, but after Dementia 13 I was never able to get through to him again!" Campbell, William.  Interviewed by Tim Lucas in Video Watchdog Magazine, issue #4, pg. 48, from the article "The Trouble with TITIAN: Francis Ford Coppolas Lost Thriller"   The Pit and the Pendulum (1961). Like Campbell and Patrick Magee, Anders had been borrowed by Coppola from the cast of Cormans just completed The Young Racers. After Dementia 13, Anders never had such a sizable role again, appearing in numerous small parts in both television and film until her death from breast cancer in 1996.   Patrick Magee as Dr. Justin Caleb. Magees role as the family doctor who manages to solve the mystery in Dementia 13 was one of many horror film parts the Tony Award-winning actor accepted during the course of his distinguished career. He had just finished shooting Cormans The Young Racers when Coppola convinced him, along with his Racers co-stars Campbell and Anders, to appear in Coppolas debut feature. Years later, Campbell warmly remembered Magee as being a brilliant performer although a little prone to overacting.  
* Bart Patton as Billy Haloran
* Mary Mitchell as Kane
* Eithne Dunne as Lady Haloran
* Peter Read as John Haloran
* Karl Schnazer as Simon, the poacher
* Ron Perry as Arthur
* Derry ODonovan as Lillian, the maid
* Barbara Dowling as Kathleen Haloran

==Production== gothic and psychological, with some kind of terrible knife killing scene thrown in. So I wrote the script to order." DiFranco, J. Philip. The Movie World of Roger Corman, Chelsea House Publishers, 1979. ISBN 0-87754-122-1
     

Coppola wrote a brief draft story idea in one night. The next morning, he described to Corman the most vividly detailed sequence:  a half naked woman ties several dolls to the bottom of a lake, then surfaces to find herself at the feet of an axe murderer—"Axed to death!" Coppola exclaimed.  Corman was impressed enough to immediately  provide Coppola with the $22,000 for the film. The young director was able to arrange an additional $20,000 in financing himself by pre-selling the European rights to a producer named Raymond Stross. McGee, Mark Thomas. Faster and Furiouser: The Revised and Fattened Fable of American International Pictures, McFarland & Company, Inc., 1996. ISBN 0-7864-0137-0  Coppola did not inform Corman of the productions additional funding, and quickly moved the initial $22,000 into a bank account in case an angry Corman ever attempted to reclaim his original investment. Goodwin, Michael and Wise, Naomi. On the Edge:  The Life & Times of Francis Ford Coppola, William Morrow & Co,, 1989. ISBN 0-688-04767-X
  

Coppola’s friend Al Locatelli served as the film’s art director and helped Coppola write the final script in three days, uncredited. The speed in which the screenplay was completed resulted in unrealistic, “stilted” dialogue that Campbell recalled as being very difficult for the actors to speak. Campbell, William. Dementia 13 DVD, The Roan Group/Troma Entertainment, 2001, audio commentary.       

The majority of the American actors in the cast were friends of Coppola’s from UCLA, and many of them paid their own way to Ireland for the opportunity to appear in a film.  Most of the Irish cast members were from the Abbey Theatre and were paid strictly minimum wage salaries. Eithne Dunne received approximately $600 for her performance.  Cast and crew lived together in a farm house located outside of Dublin. 

Howth Castle, located in the Dublin suburb of Howth, depicted the fictitious "Castle Haloran" in the film.
 dubbing the picture the way he wanted it, adding voiceovers to simplify some of the scenes.  Worse, he wanted some extra violence added, another axe murder at least..."  Jack Hill was later hired by Corman to shoot some brief sequences featuring actor Karl Schanzer as a comical poacher who is beheaded by the murderer.
 padded by at least five minutes. Gary Kurtz, one of Cormans assistants at the time, recalled, "So we shot this stupid prologue that had nothing to do with the rest of the film. It was some guy who was supposed to be a psychiatrist, sitting in his office and giving the audience a test to see if they were mentally fit to see the picture. The film was actually released with that prologue." Naha, Ed. The Films of Roger Corman: Brilliance on a Budget, Arco Publishing Inc., 1982. ISBN 0-668-05308-9
  The prologue was directed by Monte Hellman.  This cheap William Castle-style gimmick also included a "D-13 Test" handout given to theatre patrons that was ostensibly devised by a "medical expert" to weed out psychologically unfit people from viewing the film. The test consisted of such questions as "The most effective way of settling a dispute is with one quick stroke of an axe to your adversarys head?" and "Have you ever been hospitalized in a locked mental ward, sanitarium, rest home or other facility for the treatment of mental illness?", with Yes or No as the only possible answers.

The rockabilly song that is played at the opening of the movie is "Hes Caught" by Buddy and The Fads, written by Arthur "Buddy" Fowler.  The song was recorded in 1959 in Hollywood, CA. for Accent Records.  

==Response== The Psychotronic Encyclopedia of Film, Ballantine Books, 1983. ISBN 0-345-30381-4 Time Out Film Guide, said "The location (an Irish castle) is used imaginatively, the Gothic atmosphere is suitably potent, and theres a wonderfully sharp cameo from Patrick Magee..."  Danny Peary, in his Guide for the Film Fanatic, stated that despite the "hopelessly confusing" storyline, "...the horror sequences are very exciting." Peary, Danny. Guide for the Film Fanatic, Simon & Schuster, 1986. ISBN 0-671-61081-3 

 , wrote that the film was "a remarkably confident and proficient thriller. Several of its components hint at the creativity that was still to come from Coppola, and the finished product is a testament to his ingenuity..." Charles, John. Video Watchdog Magazine, issue #37, pgs. 54 - 56.  Review of Dementia 13 laserdisc  Kim Newman has opined "Coppola...works fast and creative in Dementia 13, making memorable, shocking little sequences out of the killings and the implied haunting, using his locations well and highlighting unexpected eeriness like a transistor radio burbling distorted pop music as it sinks into a lake along with a just-murdered corpse."  Dementia 13 has a 65% favorable rating on Rotten Tomatoes, out of 20 reviewers surveyed.   

==Home video==

The Roan Group released a laserdisc and DVD of the film, both of which included an audio commentary by Campbell. The DVD also featured the written version of the "D-13 Test" in digital form as an extra. However, the filmed five-minute prologue featuring the test has not been included on any of the numerous available home video versions of the title.  On April 26, 2011 the film was released on Blu-ray.  

==See also==
* List of films in the public domain

==References==
 

==External links==
 
*  
*    at Google Videos
*  
*  
*  
*   at Trailers From Hell
* 
* 
* 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 