Come and See
 
{{Infobox film
| name           = Come and See
| image          = ComeAndSeePoster.jpg
| alt            = 
| caption        = US theatrical release poster
| director       = Elem Klimov
| producer       = 
| writer         = Elem Klimov Ales Adamovich
| starring       = Aleksei Kravchenko Olga Mironova
| music          = Oleg Yanchenko
| cinematography = Alexei Rodionov
| editing        = Valeriya Belova
| studio         = Mosfilm Belarusfilm
| distributor    = Sovexportfilm
| released       =  
| runtime        = 142 minutes  
| country        = Soviet Union
| language       = Belarusian Russian German
}} war Drama drama film Best Foreign Language Film at the 58th Academy Awards, but was not accepted as a nominee. 
 The Apocalypse of John, in which "Come and see" is said in the first, third, fifth, and seventh verses  as an invitation to look upon the destruction caused by the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse.  Chapter 6, verses 7–8  have been cited as being particularly relevant to the film: 

 And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth beast say, Come and see! And I looked, and behold a pale horse: and his name that sat on him was Death, and Hell followed with him. And power was given unto them over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, and with hunger, and with death, and with the beasts of the earth. 

==Plot==
In 1943 two Belarusian boys are digging in a sand field looking for abandoned rifles in order to join the Soviet partisan forces. Yustin, an old man, warns them not to dig (using sarcasm and reverse psychology). One of the boys, Flyora (Aleksei Kravchenko), finds an SVT-40 rifle. The next day partisans arrive at his house and take Flyora with them, to the dismay of Flyoras mother. She fears that the loss of her son, like his father before him, will lessen her and her daughters chances of survival.

The partisans converge in a forest and prepare to confront the Germans. Flyora joins their forces as a low-rank militiaman and is ordered to do all the labor in the detachment. When the partisans are ready to move on, their commander, Kosach (played by Liubomiras Lauciavicius and dubbed by Valeriy Kravchenko), orders Flyora to remain behind at the camp in reserve and exchange boots with one of his fellows. Bitterly disappointed, Flyora walks into the forest weeping and comes across someone else who has been left behind – Glafira (or Glasha, played by Olga Mironova), a beautiful girl infatuated with Kosach. The girl becomes delusional and confuses Flyora with Kosach and kisses him. Suddenly, German airplanes appear and begin to drop German parachutists, and the camp comes under heavy artillery fire causing Flyora to go deaf.

After hiding in the forest, the two return to Flyoras home village. His house is empty but his sisters dolls are lined up on the floor and the place is overrun by flies. They find a still-warm dinner in the oven and try to eat, but Glasha vomits seeing the flies and dolls. Denying that his family was killed, Flyora believes that his family must be hiding on a nearby island across a bog. As they run from the village, Glasha turns and sees a huge pile of bodies stacked behind Flyoras house, but is unable to tell Flyora of it. Unable to accept that his family is dead, Flyora becomes hysterical as he and Glasha painstakingly wade through the bog. At the island they meet a resistance fighter, Roubej (played by Vladas Bagdonas). Glasha tells Roubej that Flyora is mad. Roubej takes the pair to a large number of other villagers who have fled the Germans. Flyora sees Yustin, who had been doused in petrol and burnt by the Germans, and accepts that his family did not survive.

Roubej takes Flyora and two others to find food, leaving Glasha to care for the rest of the villagers. They run into SS activity and the food stored is too well-defended to be raided. Flyora unknowingly leads the group through a minefield in which two of the companions are killed. A German plane drops empty liquor bottles. At dusk, Roubej and Flyora sneak up to an occupied town and manage to steal a cow from a German-collaborating farmer, but as they flee across the fields, they are shot at. Both Roubej and the cow are killed. The next morning, Flyora, unable to move the dead cow, finds a horse and cart. He attempts to take the horse at the dismay of the owner who stops Flyora. They hear the sound of approaching German soldiers. The farmer helps Flyora hide his partisan jacket and rifle in the field, and takes him to his village of Perekhody, where they hurriedly discuss a fake identity for him.

A German Einsatzkommando unit moves into the village, first surrounding the village. While Flyora is introduced to much of the farmers family, a German officer comes inside of the house and the civilians give him food and water to eat. A collaborator also comes in the house and begins checking for anything valuable to take. Flyora starts walking outside of the house, but before he can step completely out, he is pushed down by a German soldier, much to the amusement of the other soldiers. The whole village is being herded by the German soldiers and Flyora attempts to warn everyone of their oncoming death, but is caught by another collaborator with a swastika drawn helmet and forced to run around in circles with the other men of the village. At first, the women and children are made to show their papers to the Germans, but then everyone is forced into the Village Church. 

An Obersturmführer (played by Juri Lumiste) announces to the terrified people, "those without children can leave." Everyone inside the church calls the Germans, "Beasts." Flyora takes up the offer and climbs out of the church, only to be handled by a German sergeant and shown to the Sturmbannführer, the commanding officer of the German unit. He is then thrown down and Flyora watches as a woman and her child get climb out of the church. She is grabbed by German soldiers and her child is thrown back into the church, the woman being dragged by her hair by a Collaborator and then is made to stay too. Around the whole village, drunk Germans and Collaborators laugh and listen to music, many finding ways to entertain themselves. Grenades are then hurled into the church as a truck playing music parks near the other German vehicles. Molotov cocktails are then thrown at the church while a collaborator inside of the top of the church escapes out. All the soldiers clap and laugh as the people inside burn to death. The soldiers then start firing at the church. Flamethrowers ignite the church more and music keeps playing to the sounds of the people dying inside the church. The Collaborators use most of the people that got out to herd the animals and Flyora is used in a picture, A German officer points a gun to his head while they pose for a picture. The officer does not kill him and leaves him to die. 
 
The woman who was dragged by the hair is thrown into a moving truck and presumably gang raped by the soldiers in the truck. The soldiers leave the burning village and carry an old woman outside to watch them as they leave, torches in many of the soldiers hands and music can still be heard playing as they drive away from the inferno. Flyora lies face down on the ground and is kicked by a motorcycle riding German soldier.   
 inferior race and communist sympathizers, will eventually be exterminated. The main collaborator tells that the Germans forced them to take part in the massacre. Kosach says the collaborators must pay, but not before the Germans. The  collaborators, except the soldier with the swastika helmet, douse the Germans with the can of petrol Flyora brought, but the crowd, disgusted by the sight, shoot them all down before they can be set on fire, ending their lives relatively painlessly. 
 his mothers lap. Flyora shoots at each of the images – yet he cannot bring himself to fire at the still shot of baby Hitler. A title card states that "628 villages in Byelorussia were burnt to the ground with all their inhabitants." 

In the films final scene, Flyora catches up with and blends in with his partisan comrades marching through the woods, away into the dark of the trees.

==Cast==

*Aleksey Kravchenko as Flyora
*Olga Mironova as Glasha
*Liubomiras Lauciavicius as Kosach
*Jüri Lumiste as German officer
*Evgeniy Tilicheev as Collaborator

==Production==
 

Klimov co-wrote the screenplay with Ales Adamovich, who fought with the Belarusian partisans as a teenager. According to the directors recollections, work on the film began in 1977: The 40th anniversary of the Great Victory was approaching. The management had to be given something topical. I had been reading and rereading the book I Am from the Burning Village, which consisted of the first-hand accounts of people who miraculously survived the horrors of the fascist genocide in Belorussia. Many of them were still alive then, and Belorussians managed to record some of their memories onto film. I will never forget the face and eyes of one peasant, and his quiet recollection about how his whole village had been herded into a church, and how just before they were about to be burned, an officer of the Sonderkommando gave them the offer: "Whoever has no children can leave". And he couldnt take it, he left, and left behind his wife and little kids... or about how another village was burned: the adults were all herded into a barn, but the children were left behind. And later, the drunk men surrounded them with sheepdogs and let the dogs tear the children to pieces.

And then I thought: the world doesnt know about Khatyn massacre|Khatyn! They know about Katyn massacre|Katyn, about the massacre of the Polish officers there. But they dont know about Belorussia. Even though more than 600 villages were burned there!

And I decided to make a film about this tragedy. I perfectly understood that the film would end up a harsh one. I decided that the central role of the village lad Flyora would not be played by a professional actor, who upon immersion into a difficult role could have protected himself psychologically with his accumulated acting experience, technique and skill. I wanted to find a simple boy fourteen years of age. We had to prepare him for the most difficult experiences, then capture them on film. And at the same time, we had to protect him from the stresses so that he wasnt left in the loony bin after filming was over, but was returned to his mother alive and healthy. Fortunately, with Lyosha Kravchenko, who played Flyora and who later became a good actor, everything went smoothly.

I understood that this would be a very brutal film and that it was unlikely that people would be able to watch it. I told this to my screenplay coauthor, the writer Ales Adamovich. But he replied: "Let them not watch it, then. This is something we must leave after us. As evidence of war, and as a plea for peace."
|4=Elem Klimov
|5=AIF.   }}
For a long time, filming could not begin. The State Committee for Cinematography (Goskino) would not accept the screenplay, considering it a propaganda for the "aesthetics of dirtiness" and "naturalism".  In the end, Klimov was able to start filming in 1984 without having compromised to any censorship at all. The only change became the name of the film itself, which was changed to Come and See from the original title, Kill Hitler (Elem Klimov also says this in the 2006 UK DVD release).   (interview with English subtitles). Retrieved 30 May 2013. 

The film was shot in chronological order over a period of nine months. Aleksey Kravchenko says that he underwent "the most debilitating fatigue and hunger. I kept a most severe diet, and after the filming was over I returned to school not only thin, but grey-haired."  The 2006 UK DVD sleeve states that the guns in the film were often loaded with live ammunition as opposed to blanks, for realism. Aleksey Kravchenko mentions in interviews that bullets sometimes passed just 4&nbsp;inches (10 centimeters) above his head (such as in the cow scene).

==Music== Blue Danube). At the end, during the montage, music by Richard Wagner is used, most notably the Tannhäuser (opera)|Tannhäuser Overture and the Ride from Die Walküre. The conclusion of the film uses the Lacrimosa (Requiem)|Lacrimosa from Mozarts Requiem (Mozart)|Requiem. The Soviet marching song "The Sacred War" is also played in the movie once. During the scene where Glasha dances, the background music is taken from Grigori Aleksandrovs 1936 film Circus (1936 film)|Circus.

==Reception== lists of weighted average score of 8.1/10. 

According to Klimov, the film was so shocking for audiences that ambulances were sometimes called in to take away particularly impressionable viewers, both in the Soviet Union and abroad.  During one of the after-the-film discussions, an elderly German stood up and said: "I was a soldier of the Wehrmacht; moreover, an officer of the Wehrmacht. I traveled through all of Poland and Belarus, finally reaching Ukraine. I will testify: everything that is told in this film is the truth. And the most frightening and shameful thing for me is that this film will be seen by my children and grandchildren."   

Walter Goodman, writing for The New York Times, claimed that "The history is harrowing and the presentation is graphic... Powerful material, powerfully rendered...", dismissed the ending as "a dose of instant inspirationalism," but concedes to Klimovs "unquestionable talent."  Rita Kempley, of the Washington Post, wrote that "directing with an angry eloquence,   taps into that hallucinatory nether world of blood and mud and escalating madness that Francis Ford Coppola found in Apocalypse Now. And though he draws a surprisingly vivid performance from his inexperienced teen lead, Klimovs prowess is his visual poetry, muscular and animistic, like compatriot Andrei Konchalovskys in his epic Siberiade." Mark Le Fanu wrote in Sight and Sound (03/01/1987) that Come and See is a "powerful war film... The director has elicited an excellent performance form his central actor Kravchenko." Writing about Come and See, Daneet Steffens of Entertainment Weekly (11/02/2001) wrote that "Klimov alternates the horrors of war with occasional fairy tale-like images; together they imbue the film with an unapologetically disturbing quality that persists long after the credits roll." Geoffrey Macnab of Sight and Sound (05/01/2006) wrote that "Klimovs astonishing war movie combines intense lyricism with the kind of violent bloodletting that would make even Sam Peckinpah pause."

In 2001,   and Saving Private Ryan, and it would not be surprising to learn that Steven Spielberg had screened it before making either of these.) The films central atrocity is a barbaric circus of blaring music and barking dogs in which a squadron of drunken German soldiers round up and parade the peasants to their fiery doom... The bit of actual death-camp corpse footage that Klimov uses is doubly disturbing in that it retrospectively diminishes the care with which he orchestrates the towns destruction. For the most part, he prefers to show the Gorgon as reflected in Perseuss shield. There are few images more indelible than the sight of young Alexei Kravchenkos fear-petrified expression. By some accounts the boy was hypnotized for the movies final scenes – most viewers will be as well."  In the same publication in 2009, Elliott Stein described Come and See as "a startling mixture of lyrical poeticism and expressionist nightmare." 

In 2002, Scott Tobias of   era, Come and See is far from a patriotic memorial of Russias hard-won victory. Instead, its a chilling reminder of that victorys terrible costs." 
 The Word Great Escape fans."  Tim Lott wrote in 2009 that the film "makes Apocalypse Now look lightweight". 

On 16 June 2010, Roger Ebert posted a review of Come and See as part of his "Great Movies" series, describing it as "one of the most devastating films ever about anything, and in it, the survivors must envy the dead... The film depicts brutality and is occasionally very realistic, but theres an overlay of muted nightmarish exaggeration... I must not describe the famous sequence at the end. It must unfold as a surprise for you. It pretends to roll back history. You will see how. It is unutterably depressing, because history can never undo itself, and is with us forever." 

The film was placed at number 60 on Empire (magazine)|Empire magazines "The 500 Greatest Movies of all Time" in 2008.  Come and See was also included in Channel 4s list of 50 Films to See Before You Die  and was ranked number 24 in Empire (magazine)|Empire magazines "The 100 Best Films Of World Cinema" in 2010.  Phil de Semlyen of Empire has described Come and See as "Elim Klimov’s seriously influential, deeply unsettling Belarusian opus. No film – not Apocalypse Now, not Full Metal Jacket – spells out the dehumanising impact of conflict more vividly, or ferociously... An impressionist masterpiece and possibly the worst date movie ever." 

Elem Klimov did not make any more films after Come and See, leading some critics to speculate as to why. In 2001, Klimov said, "I lost interest in making films ... Everything that was possible I felt I had already done."  Klimov died on 26 October 2003. 

===Accolades===
{| class="wikitable" width="90%"
|- style="background:#ccc; text-align:center;"
! colspan="5" style="background: LightSteelBlue;" | Awards
|- style="background:#ccc; text-align:center;"
! Award
! Date of ceremony
! Category
! Recipients and nominees
! Result
|-
| rowspan="2"| 14th Moscow International Film Festival   
| rowspan="2"| 12 July 1985
| Golden Prize
| Elem Klimov
|  
|-
| FIPRESCI prize
| Elem Klimov
|  
|}

==See also==
* List of submissions to the 58th Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film
* List of Soviet submissions for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film

==References==
 

==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
*  
*  
*   at official Mosfilm site

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 