Two Women (1999 film)
 
{{Infobox film
| name = Two Women (Do zan)
| image = Two-Woman.jpg
| director = Tahmineh Milani
| producer = Arta film, Arman film
| writer = Tahmineh Milani
| starring = Niki Karimi Mohammad Reza Forutan Merila Zarei Atila Pesiani Reza Khandan
| music = Babak Bayat
| released = 1999
| runtime = 96 min. Persian with English subtitles
}}
 1999 Iranian motion picture written and directed by Tahmineh Milani. 
 Islamic Republic, creating a portrait of traditions that conspire to trap women and stop them from realizing their full potential. In an extensive interview, Tahmineh Milani stated that the name Two Women alluded to two different potential life-stories of one woman. The film won the best screenplay award at Irans Fajr Film Festival in 1999 as well as Best Actress for Niki Karimis part in the Taormina Film Festival.

==Plot==

The film starts at some fourteen years after Fereshteh (Niki Karimi) and Royā (Merila Zarei|Merilā Zāreí) became friends, while studying architecture at a university in Tehran. The events in the life of Fereshteh over the course of the preceding fourteen years are revealed through a series of flashbacks that represent Fereshehs and Royās reminiscences. 

Fereshteh, whose family lives in reduced circumstances in Esfahan, is an excellent student who brims with hopes and expectations for her future and what she would do for her family on graduating. This fact is accentuated by Fereshtehs declining of a marriage proposal (conveyed by a female intermediary) by a student of mechanics in his last year, studying at the same university, whose father is a university professor; we are further informed that the family of this fellow student are very wealthy. Fereshteh supports herself financially through giving private tuitions to  fellow students. Royās family, on the other hand, are wealthy. She becomes one of Fereshtehs private pupils and through this a deep friendship develops between the two. 

Fereshteh is stalked by an obsessive young man, named Hassan (Mohammad Reza Foroutan|Mohammad-Rezā Foroutan), who stops at nothing for gaining her attention and, as he puts it, marrying her. He stirs up many problems, including inflicting serious bodily harm by throwing acid to Fereshtehs cousin on mistaking him as Fereshtehs boyfriend. This prompts Fereshtehs father (Rezā Khāndān) forcing her to return to their home in Esfahan (although Fereshteh lives independently in a university dormitory, she is formally in the care of her uncle, her fathers brother, who lives in Tehran); through some inverted logic, the father believes that the actions of the stalker must have been provoked by some impropriety on the part of his daughter. 
 football on street.  

A man, named Ahmad (Atila Pesiani), who helps Fereshteh and her family with the legal case ensuing this accident, asks Fereshtehs hand and despite Fereshtehs initial fierce opposition to the proposal, by promising to be supportive of Fereshtehs plan to pursue her studies following the opening of universities, succeeds in gaining Fereshtehs consent and the two marry. After the marriage, he proves to be an utterly jealous husband who bars Fereshteh from having any contact with the outside world that he does not approve of, including association with Royā; although he does not know Royā at all, he feels a visceral hatred towards her, believing that she represents the liberal society that he finds so detestable. 

When Fereshteh applies to court for divorce, the presiding judge dismisses the case outright, stating that none of the actions of her husband, that suffocate her both emotionally and intellectually, were sufficient for the court to grant divorce. The judges decision is based on Fereshteh answering a series of questions, such as whether her husband was violent, whether he was unfaithful, whether he had drugs additions, etc., in the negative; in response to Fereshtehs repeated pleas and appeal to her being a human being, the judge retorts not to waste the time of the court. It is remarkable that although one never sees Ahmad beating Fereshteh, in reality he is a violent man, as he constantly verbally abuses Fereshteh and often brandishes a kitchen knife while doing so; this is Milānis sutbtle way of showing how domestic violence is often not recognized even by its very victims. Fereshteh and her husband have two sons (both in their teens when Fereshteh and Royā meet after fourteen years) who outwardly love both parents equally, but inwardly stand on the side of their mother, who, amongst others, teaches them to the best of her ability. 

A chance meeting of Fereshteh, her stalker (still stalking on being released after spending thirteen years in jail) and Fereshtehs husband in the same place proves fateful to the three.

==Principal cast and characters ==
* Niki Karimi - Fereshteh 
* Merila Zarei - Roya
* Mohammad Reza Forutan - Hassan
* Reza Khandan - Fereshtehs father 
* Atila Pesiani - Ahmad 

==See also==
* Tahmineh Milani
* Niki Karimi
* Merila Zarei
* Cinema of Iran

==External links==
* 
* Jasmin Darznik, Free bird: Tahmineh Milanis "Two Women", August 8, 2000,  .

 
 
 
 
 
 