Mysterious Island (1941 film)
Mysterious Island, or Таинственный остров in Russian, is a USSR film adaptation of the 1874 novel by Jules Verne, The Mysterious Island (LÎle mystérieuse). The story is a follow-up to Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea.

==Plot summary==

During the siege of Richmond, Virginia, in the American Civil War, five northern prisoners of war decide to escape in a rather unusual way &ndash; by hijacking a balloon.

The group eventually crash-lands on a cliff-bound, volcanic, unknown (and fictitious) island, located in the South Pacific. They name it "Lincoln Island" in honour of American President Abraham Lincoln.  With the knowledge of the brilliant engineer, the five are able to sustain themselves on the island, producing fire, pottery, bricks, nitroglycerine, iron, a simple electric telegraph, and even a seaworthy ship. They also manage to find their geographical location.

The mystery of the island seems to come from periodic and inexplicable   from his fall from the balloon, the mysterious rescue of his dog Top from a wild manatee, a box full of equipment (guns and ammunition, tools, etc...), the finding of a message in the sea calling for help, and so on.

A crew of pirates arrives at the Lincoln Island to use it as their hideout. After some fighting with the heroes, the pirate ship is mysteriously destroyed by an explosion, and the pirates themselves are found dead, apparently in combat, but with no visible wounds.

The secret of the island is revealed when it turns out to be Captain Nemos hideout, and home harbour of the Nautilus (Verne)|Nautilus. Captain Nemo had been the savior of the heroes, providing them with equipment, sending a message about a fellow castaway, torpedoing the pirate ship and killing the pirates with an electric gun. 

==Cast==
A. Andriyenko-Zemskov ... Pencroft 
Yuri Grammatikati ... Herbert 
Pavel Kiyansky .... Gideon Spillett 
Nikolai Komissarov ... Captain Nemo 
I. Kozlov ... Ayrton  Cyrus Harding (Smith) 
R. Ross .... Neb 
Andrei Sova .... Jupe 

==Crew==
B. M. Chelintsev and Eduard Pentslin (directors)
M. Kalinin, Boris Shelontsev, and Jules Verne (writers)
==External links==
* 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 