The Thin Blue Line (1988 film)
 
{{Infobox film name = The Thin Blue Line image =  The_Thin_Blue_Line_poster.jpg caption = Theatrical Poster director = Errol Morris producer = Mark Lipson writer = Errol Morris music = Philip Glass starring = Randall Adams David Harris cinematography = Robert Chappell Stefan Czapsky distributor  = Miramax Films  (USA Theatrical)  Umbrella Entertainment released  =   runtime = 103 minutes country = United States language = English budget =   gross = US$1,209,846  (US and Canada)    
}}

The Thin Blue Line is a 1988 American documentary film by Errol Morris, depicting the story of Randall Dale Adams, a man convicted and sentenced to life in prison for a murder he did not commit.  Adams case was reviewed and he was released from prison approximately a year after the films release. 

==Synopsis== Thanksgiving weekend in 1976. In October 1976, 28-year-old Randall Adams and his brother had left Ohio. They were driving to California. En route, they arrived in Dallas on the night of Thanksgiving (United States)|Thanksgiving, Thursday 25 November 1976. The next morning, Adams was offered a job. On Saturday, 27 November Adams went to start work at his new job but no one turned up because it was a weekend. On the way home, his car ran out of fuel. 

David Ray Harris, who had just turned sixteen, came by in a car that he had stolen from his neighbor in Vidor, Texas before driving to Dallas with his fathers pistol and a shotgun. Harris offered Adams a ride. The two spent the day together during which they also had some alcohol and marijuana. That evening they went to a drive-in movie. 

Robert W Wood, a Dallas police officer, was working the graveyard shift with his partner, one of the first female police officers in Dallas that was assigned to patrol. Shortly after midnight, Wood stopped the stolen car in the 3400 block of N Hampton Road because its headlights were not on. As Wood walked up to the car, he was shot twice and killed by someone in the car. 

The first shot hit Wood in the arm, passing through his flashlight. The next shot hit Wood in the chest. Woods wife had bought him a bulletproof vest and had it under the Christmas tree, or had stored it away to give to him on Christmas Day. The Dallas Police Department investigation led back to Harris, who after returning to Vidor had told friends that he was responsible for the crime. When interviewed by police, Harris accused Adams of the murder.       Harris led police to the car driven from the scene of the crime, as well as to a .22 Short caliber revolver he identified as the murder weapon.
 sentenced to death under Texas law. The prosecutor (Douglas D. Mulder) does not appear in the film.
 thin blue line" separating society from "Lawlessness|anarchy". This is a re-working of a line from Rudyard Kiplings poem "Barrack-Room Ballads|Tommy" in which he describes British soldiers (nicknamed "Tommy Atkins") as the "thin red line", from the color of their uniforms and their formation.

==Production==
The film was directed by Errol Morris and scored by Philip Glass. Morris was originally going to film a documentary about prosecution psychiatrist, Dr. James Grigson, known as Doctor Death,   who testified in more than 100 trials that resulted in death sentences.  As an expert psychiatrist, Dr. Grigson made a name for himself by giving testimony in capital cases for the prosecution. Under the law in Texas, the death penalty can only be issued if the jury is convinced that the defendant is not just guilty, but will commit violent crimes in the future if not put to death. In almost every instance, Dr. Grigson would, after examining a defendant, testify that he had found the individual in question to be an incurable Psychopathy#Sociopathy|sociopath, who it was "one hundred per cent certain" would kill again. {{cite news |url=http://www.errolmorris.com/content/profile/singer_predilections.html>
 |title=Predilections|publisher=New York Times |date=February 2, 1989 |first=Errol |last=Morris |accessdate=2010-01-12}}  Grigson told the jury that Adams would be an ongoing menace if kept alive but Morris, after meeting Adams, became skeptical that he committed the crime.

The film contained re-enactment scenes built carefully from witnesses statements, which became common in later documentaries.     Although the film recreates several versions of the shooting, it does not recreate one in which David Harris shoots the officer, the interpretation which it argues is true.

The final scene, in which Morris and Harris are only heard, while shots of a tape recorder appear from various angles, was not originally planned. Morriss camera broke down on the day of the interview, forcing Morris to use a tape recorder to document the dialogue. 

Prior to directing the film, Morris worked as a private detective. Once fascinated by the Adams/Harris case, he applied those skills to his research on the film. The weekend that David Harris killed Mark Walker Mays, Morris actually had an interview scheduled with Harris. Morris remarked in an interview with James Hughes: “I often say its my favorite excuse for missing an appointment: Im sorry, I was off killing someone.” 

Morriss interview style, that of the subject staring directly into the camera, led to a later invention that his wife termed the Interrotron.  It was first used in Fast Cheap and Out of Control (1997), and it places Morris behind a curtain staring into a camera, which feeds into a teleprompter-like device that the interviewee can interact with. The interviewee, therefore, looks directly at Morris, and the camera. 

Marketing the film was not an easy task, as Morris wished to avoid the label of documentary attached to his film. Miramax, the film’s distributor that had originally picked it up for its unconventional look, used marketing hooks to make the film “transition from the arthouse to the multiplex”.  Harvey Weinstein, head of Miramax, declared: “Never has Miramax had a movie where a man’s life hangs in the balance”. He even sent a note to Errol Morris pushing him to promote the film better during interviews. The note includes “Heard your NPR interview and you were boring” and recommends the director to sell the movie as a highly thrilling and emotional experience similar to watching thrillers or horror movies, to adopt shorter and clearer sentences.  This example proves how special and different the documentary was that it required references to narrative cinema to attract the audience’s attention. This also helped Miramax gain more publicity in return.

The Corporation for Public Broadcasting, National Endowment for the Arts, Program Development Company Productions Inc., public television stations, and The Chubb Group of Insurance Companies funded the documentary. 

==Box office==
The Thin Blue Line grossed $1,209,846 in the US and Canada.  On its opening weekend, in only one theatre, it took in $17,814.  Although the film is the 95th highest grossing documentary film released since 1982,  Morris says he lost money on the production. 

==Home media==
The Thin Blue Line was released on DVD by Umbrella Entertainment in June 2007. The DVD includes Umbrella Entertainment trailers as special features.    A special edition Blu-ray of the film was released in North America by the Criterion Collection in March 2015. New features include interviews with Morris and filmmaker Joshua Oppenheimer.   

==Aftermath== Dallas County for a retrial.  The district attorneys office declined to prosecute the case again and Adams was subsequently ordered released as a result of a habeas corpus hearing in 1989.

After Adams release from prison, he ended up in a legal battle with Morris concerning the rights to his story. The matter was settled out of court after Adams was granted sole use of anything written or made on the subject of his life.  Adams himself said of the matter: "Mr. Morris felt he had the exclusive rights to my life story. ... I did not sue Errol Morris for any money or any percentages of The Thin Blue Line, though the media portrayed it that way." 

Morris, for his part, remembers: "When he got out, he became very angry at the fact that he had signed a release giving me rights to his life story. And he felt as though I had stolen something from him. Maybe I had, maybe I just dont understand what its like to be in prison for that long, for a crime you hadnt committed. In a certain sense, the whole crazy deal with the release was fueled by my relationship with his attorney. And its a long, complicated story, but I guess when people are involved, theres always a mess somewhere." 

Despite being wrongly imprisoned for twelve years, Adams received no payment from the state of Texas. It is said that if Adams were “found to be wrongly convicted under today’s law in Texas, he would get $80,000 for each year of incarceration,” additionally “at the time his conviction was thrown out, wrongly convicted prisoners could get a lump sum payment of $25,000 if pardoned by the governor.” However, since Adams was released because his case was dismissed, not pardoned, he received no payment from the state after his release for his wrongful conviction. 

Adams died in October 2010 but lived in such obscurity that his death was not discovered by the media until June 2011. 

==David Ray Harris==

Harris had testified in the original trial that he was the passenger in the stolen car, that he allowed Adams to drive and that Adams committed the murder. He recanted this testimony at Adams habeas corpus hearing, but never admitted guilt in a judicial setting and was never charged in the case. In 2004, Harris was executed by lethal injection for the unrelated 1985 murder of Mark Mays in Beaumont, Texas, which occurred during an attempted abduction of Mays girlfriend.   

==Critical reception==
The Thin Blue Line has a metascore of 79 on Metacritic  and 100% fresh rating on Rotten Tomatoes.  Gene Siskel named it the 7th best film of 1988. Chicago Tribune. 

==Awards== New York National Board Academy Award. 

==Legacy==
Variety credits the film in a 2008 retrospective of documentaries as “the most political work of cinema in the last 20 years.” 

The film has had a considerable influence on later television and documentary film, often credited with pioneering the style of modern crime-scene reenactments. 

In 2001, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". 

Current TV placed the film 2nd on their list of 50 Documentaries to See Before You Die in 2011.

In a 2014 Sight and Sound poll, film critics voted The Thin Blue Line the fifth best documentary film of all time.   

==Postmodern themes== Linda Williams refers to documentaries that seek only to reveal the past as supporting the notion of an “intensified nostalgia for a past that is already lost.” Conversely, "The Thin Blue Line" suggests Adams innocence by clouding a previously established history. 

Stanford Law Review author Richard Sherwin believes The Thin Blue Line actually presents two plots. Through the construction and ordering of the non-linear story Morris presents, he reveals an easy-to-follow narrative implicating Harris instead of Adams, not unlike the story that implicated Adams in the first place, because it presents an easy-to-believe retelling of history. The other, is what Sherwin points to as an example of “postmodern skepticism." Sherwin notes sociologist Jean Baudrillards interpretation of the postmodern media landscape "flattening" meaning, and the impossibility of “truth, authority, and history” existing, as fitting within this notion. 

He criticizes The Thin Blue Line for failing to resolve what he calls an “acausal” plot, referencing certain details about the case that were presented but remain unanswered, such as where Adams actually was the night of the crime. Instead, the end of the film abandons the “acausal” plot by returning to the easy-to-believe narrative, that which paints Harris as the perpetrator. Sherwin argues that for the film to succeed as an affirmative postmodern work, it must contextualize the past events within a present narrative. In short, reveal through the clouding of history a present challenge, that of resisting the lure of a narrative and fulfilling “their sworn duty to convict only in the absence of reasonable doubt." 

In an interview at the Museum of Modern Art, however, Morris denies being a postmodern at all, joking that “one of the nice things about Cambridge, Massachusetts is that Baudrillard isnt in the phone book”.  In a video interview for the Columbia Journalism Review, Morris reiterates his view of an inherent value in truth, acknowledging that our view of history will always be flawed, but that truth should still be sought after. 

== Literature ==
* Renée R. Curry: Errol Morris Construction of Innocence in "The Thin Blue Line". In: Rocky Mountain Review of Language and Literature, Vol. 49, No. 2 (1995), pp.&nbsp;153–167. 
* Linda Williams: Truth, History, and The Thin Blue Line. In: Barry Keith Grant/Jeannette Sloniowski (eds.): Documenting the documentary: close readings of documentary film and video. 1998. ISBN 978-0814326398

==References==
 

==External links==
* 
*  from Errol Morris|ErrolMorris.com
*  at The Officer Down Memorial Page, Inc

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 