The Champ (1931 film)
 
{{Infobox film
  | name = The Champ
  | image = The Champ poster.jpg
  | caption = Theatrical release poster
  | director = King Vidor
  | producer = King Vidor
  | writer = Frances Marion Leonard Praskins
  | starring = Wallace Beery Jackie Cooper Irene Rich Roscoe Ates
  | music = Irving Berlin
  | cinematography = Gordon Avil
  | editing = Hugh Wynn
  | distributor = Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
  | released =  
  | runtime = 87 minutes
  | language = English
  | country = United States
  | budget = gross = $1.5 million   accessed 19 April 2014 
  | preceded by =
  | followed by =
}}
The Champ is a 1931 American film directed by King Vidor from a screenplay by Frances Marion, Leonard Praskins and Wanda Tuchock, and starring Wallace Beery and Jackie Cooper, that tells the story of a washed up alcoholic boxer who tries to put his life together for the sake of his young son.
 Oscar for Best Story. 

==Production==
Screenwriter Frances Marion wrote the title role specifically for Wallace Beery, who by 1931 had suffered a temporary decline from star to an aging   nomination for  n studios to play Buddha in order to take the role in The Champ. "The Champ Rejects Fortune." The New York Times. November 15, 1931.  Cooper was paid $1,500 a week while working on the film.  A special outdoor set, rather than location shooting, was built to accommodate the Tijuana horse racing track scenes.  Shooting began in mid-August 1931  and ended eight weeks later, at which time Jackie Coopers contract with Paramount Pictures was transferred to MGM. 
 Astor Theatre in New York City.  Wallace Beery flew his own plane from Los Angeles, California, cross-country to attend the premiere.  After the films debut, Beery declared Cooper was a "great kid" but that he would not work with the child actor again,  a promise he broke within the year.

==Plot==
Andy "Champ" Purcell (Wallace Beery) is the former world heavyweight champion, now down on his luck and living in squalid conditions with his eight-year-old son "Dink" in Tijuana, Mexico.  Champ attempts to train and to convince promoters to set up a fight for him, but his efforts are consistently stymied by his alcoholism.  Dink is repeatedly disappointed and let down by his fathers irresponsible actions and frequent broken promises to quit drinking, but his utter devotion to his father nonetheless never wavers.

In addition to his drinking problem, Champ is also a compulsive gambler, another vice which he repeatedly promises Dink he will surrender (but never does). After a winning streak, he fulfills a previous promise to buy Dink a horse, whom they subsequently name "Little Champ" and decide to enter into a race.  At the track, Dink happens across a woman who, unknown to either of them, is actually his mother Linda. She is now remarried to Tony, a wealthy man who owns one of the other horses in the race.

Linda and Tony observe Dink and Champ together and realize that Dink is her son.  Champ allows Linda to see Dink, who accepts that she is his mother. But Dink feels no emotion toward her, as she has never been part of his life. Linda resolves to remove Dink from the negative atmosphere in which hes growing up and have him live with her family.

Catching Champ during an all-night gambling binge, Tony asks him to turn Dink over so that Tony and Linda can put Dink into school. Champ refuses. As the exhausted Dink sleeps on a nearby table, Tony bluntly observes that Champ is not a good father. The night of gambling ends with Champ having lost Little Champ, which devastates Dink. Champ asks Linda for enough money to buy the horse back, and she gives it to him. But before he can buy the horse back, he starts gambling again and loses the money Linda loaned him. He also winds up in jail, breaking Dinks heart once more.

Ashamed of his actions and with his spirit broken, Champ finally agrees to send an unwilling Dink to live with Tony and Linda. On the train ride home, Tony and Linda try their best to welcome Dink into their family. Dink does not dislike them, but he is consumed only by thoughts of his father. He runs away back to Tijuana, where he finds that Champ has a fight scheduled with the Mexican heavyweight champion.  When he sees Dink, Champ immediately returns to good spirits. He trains hard for the fight and, for the first time, really does stay away from drinking and gambling. Champ is determined to win the fight, make Dink proud of him, and use his prize money to buy back Little Champ.

Tony and Linda attend the fight, bringing genuine best wishes and assurances that they will make no further efforts to separate Dink from Champ. The match is brutal, and Champ is seriously injured. Dink and the others in his corner urge him to throw in the towel, but Champ refuses to allow that. He musters a last burst of energy, and knocks out his opponent.  After the fight, he triumphantly presents Little Champ to Dink. But after witnessing his sons overjoyed reaction, Champ collapses.

Champ is brought into his dressing room, where a doctor determines that his injuries are mortal. Champ urges Dink to cheer up and then dies, leaving Dink inconsolable.  Despite the best efforts of all of the men and boys in the room, who one by one attempt to calm him, Dink continually wails, "I want the Champ!" Finally, Dink spots Linda enter the room.  Dink looks at her, cries out, "Mother!" and runs into her arms. She picks him up and he sobs, "The Champ is dead, mama." She turns and carries him out of the room as he buries his face in her shoulder, crying.

==Cast (in credits order)==
*Wallace Beery as Champ
*Jackie Cooper as Dink
*Irene Rich as Linda
*Roscoe Ates as Sponge
*Edward Brophy as Tim
*Hale Hamilton as Tony
*Jesse Scott as Jonah
*Marcia Mae Jones as Mary Lou

==Assessment==
 , Edward Brophy, and Wallace Beery in The Champ]]
The film, along with Beerys role in Min and Bill, transformed Beery from aging character actor to a verified star.   The picture also made nine-year-old Jackie Cooper the first child star of the 1930s, an era noted for its numerous, popular child actors.  

At the time the movie was released, critics criticized the films lack of originality. Slide, Anthony, ed. Selected Film Criticism. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press, 1982. ISBN 0-8108-1570-2  For example, The New York Times declared that "something more novel and subtle" was needed, although it also praised Beerys acting.  Variety (magazine)|Variety, too, very much liked Beery in the film, noting that he delivered a "studied, adult" performance.  Time (magazine)|Time called the film repetitive, blasted Cooper for sniveling, and accused director King Vidor of laying "on pathos with a steam-shovel."  Nonetheless, Time praised the movie, declaring it "Utterly false and thoroughly convincing..."  Many critics cited the "special chemistry" between Beery and Cooper, which led the two actors to be paired again numerous times.  Cooper and Beery had no such chemistry off-screen.  "He always made me feel uncomfortable," Cooper said,  and declared that Beery treated him like an "unkept dog".  Cooper, who made several films as a child with Beery, called Beery "a big disappointment", and accused him of upstaging and other attempts to undermine the boys performances out of what Cooper presumed was jealousy.   Despite the films kitschiness and melodrama, critics today still highly praise The Champ.  Lutz, Tom. "Mens Tears and the Role of Melodrama." In Boys Dont Cry?: Rethinking Narratives of Masculinity and Emotion in the U.S. Milette Shamir and Jennifer Travis, eds. New York: Columbia University Press, 2002. ISBN 0-231-12034-6 

The Champ has been described as an inverted Chick flick|womens film, because men in the film are not generally depicted at the top of the socio-economic ladder but are shown as a primary childcare provider.  The famous final scene, in which the camera is thrust into Jackie Coopers weeping face, has been compared to similar aggressive and intrusive camera work in classic motion pictures such as Liebelei (Max Ophüls, dir.; 1933) and Broken Blossoms (D.W. Griffith, dir.; 1919), and the films of Roberto Rossellini. 

The Champ has had significant cultural effect. A number of motion pictures in the 1930s, some of them even starring Wallace Beery, repeated the basic story about a man surrendering to drink and redeemed by the love of his long-suffering son.  Film critic Judith Crist has argued that almost any film pairing an adult actor alongside a child actor must be compared to The Champ in terms of the chemistry between the actors and the effectiveness of the film.  The film had an immediate effect on world cinema as well. The Champ is considered one source film which inspired Yasujiro Ozus classic Japanese film, Passing Fancy (Dekigokoro, 1933).  The film was, in part, the inspiration for the father and son in the Berenstain Bears books. 

==Remakes== The Clown, The Champ). 

==Notes==
 

== External links ==
*  
*  
*  

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 