Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937 film)
 
 
 
 
{{Infobox film
| name           = Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs
| image          = Snow White 1937 poster.png
| caption        = Original theatrical one-sheet poster
| writer         = Ted Sears Richard Creedon Otto Englander Dick Rickard Earl Hurd Merrill De Maris Dorothy Ann Blank Webb Smith
| based on       =   David Hand (supervising) William Cottrell Wilfred Jackson Larry Morey Perce Pearce Ben Sharpsteen
| producer       = Walt Disney Walt Disney Productions RKO Radio Pictures Paul Smith Leigh Harline
| released       =     Eddie Collins Moroni Olsen Stuart Buchanan
| cinematography =
| runtime        = 83 minutes
| country        = United States
| language       = English
| budget         = $1,488,423 
| gross          = $416 million 
}}
 Walt Disney fairy tale cel animated Walt Disney Animated Classics series. The story was adapted by storyboard artists Dorothy Ann Blank, Richard Creedon, Merrill De Maris, Otto Englander, Earl Hurd, Dick Rickard, Ted Sears and Webb Smith. David Hand was the supervising director, while William Cottrell, Wilfred Jackson, Larry Morey, Perce Pearce, and Ben Sharpsteen directed the films individual sequences.
 top ten performers at the North American box office.
 Best Musical list of the greatest American animated film of all time in 2008. Disneys take on the fairytale has had a huge cultural impact, resulting in popular theme park attractions, a video game, and a Broadway musical.

== Plot ==
  Snow White Magic Mirror daily "who is the fairest one of all". For several years the mirror always answered that the Queen was, pleasing her.
 Huntsman to take Snow White into the forest and kill her. She further demands that the huntsman return with Snow Whites heart in a jeweled box as proof of the deed. However, the Huntsman cannot bring himself to kill Snow White. He tearfully begs for her forgiveness, revealing the Queen wants her dead, and urges her to flee into the woods and never look back. Lost and frightened, the princess is befriended by woodland creatures who lead her to a cottage deep in the woods. Finding seven small chairs in the cottages dining room, Snow White assumes the cottage is the untidy home of seven orphaned children.

In reality, the cottage belongs to seven adult dwarfs, named Doc, Grumpy, Happy, Sleepy, Bashful, Sneezy, and Dopey, who work in a nearby mine. Returning home, they are alarmed to find their cottage clean and suspect that an intruder has invaded their home. The dwarfs find Snow White upstairs, asleep across three of their beds. Snow White awakes to find the dwarfs at her bedside and introduces herself, and all of the dwarfs eventually welcome her into their home after they learn she can cook and clean beautifully. Snow White keeps house for the dwarfs while they mine for jewels during the day, and at night they all sing, play music and dance.

Meanwhile, the Queen discovers that Snow White is still alive when the mirror again answers that Snow White is the fairest in the land and reveals that the heart in the jeweled box is actually that of a pig. Using magic to disguise herself as an old hag, the Queen creates a poisoned apple that will put whoever eats it into the "Sleeping Death", a curse that can only be broken by “love’s first kiss”. The Queen goes to the cottage while the dwarfs are away, but the animals are wary of her and rush off to find the dwarfs. The Queen tricks Snow White into biting into the poisoned apple. As Snow White falls asleep the Queen proclaims that she will be the fairest of the land. The dwarfs return with the animals as the Queen leaves the cottage and give chase, trapping her on a cliff. She tries to roll a boulder over them but before she can do so, lightning strikes the cliff, causing her to fall to her death, with the boulder falling after her.

The dwarfs return to their cottage and find Snow White seemingly dead, being kept in a deathlike slumber by the potion. Unwilling to bury her out of sight in the ground, they instead place her in a glass coffin trimmed with gold in a clearing in the forest. Together with the woodland creatures, they keep watch over her. After some time, a prince, who had previously met and fallen in love with Snow White, learns of her eternal sleep and visits her coffin. Saddened by her apparent death, he kisses her, which breaks the spell and awakens her. The dwarfs and animals all rejoice as the Prince takes Snow White to his castle.

== Cast ==
  introduces each of the Seven Dwarfs in a scene from the original 1937 Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs theatrical trailer.]]

*   in the castle. Despite this, she retains a cheerful but naïve demeanor.
*   and uses a poisoned apple to remove Snow White from her path without killing her.
*  . He immediately falls in love with her and her voice. He later reappears to revive her.
*   and often mixes up his words.
* Pinto Colvig as Grumpy: Grumpy initially disapproves of Snow Whites presence in the dwarfs home, but later warns her of the threat posed by the Queen and rushes to her aid upon realizing that she is in danger, leading the charge himself. He has the biggest nose of the dwarfs, and is frequently seen with one eye shut.
* Otis Harlan as Happy: Happy is the joyous dwarf and is usually portrayed laughing.
*  , who would later voice many other characters for Disney films was considered to voice Sleepy by Walt Disney.
* Scotty Mattraw as Bashful: Bashful is the shyest of the dwarfs, and is often embarrassed by the presence of any attention directed at him.
*  ), which are seen blowing even the heaviest of objects across a room.
*  . He is clumsy and mute, with Happy explaining that he has simply "never tried" to speak. In the movies trailer, Walt Disney describes Dopey as "nice, but sort of silly". Mel Blanc was considered to voice Dopey by Walt Disney. 
* Moroni Olsen as The Magic Mirror: The Slave of the Magic Mirror appears as a green mask in clouds of smoke. The Queen regularly asks him who is the fairest in the land. Humbert the Huntsman: Despite his status as the Queens assassin, the Huntsman cannot bear to kill Snow White, even when the Queen orders him to take the princess heart.

== Production ==
 

Development on Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs began in early 1934, and in June 1934, Walt Disney announced the production of his first feature, to be released under Walt Disney Productions,  to The New York Times.  Before Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, the Disney studio had been primarily involved in the production of animated short subjects in the Mickey Mouse and Silly Symphonies series. Disney hoped to expand his studios prestige and revenues by moving into features,    and estimated that Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs could be produced for a budget of  ; this was ten times the budget of an average Silly Symphony. 
 cel animated Roy Disney Lillian attempted mortgage his house to help finance the films production, which eventually ran up a total cost of $1,488,422.74, a massive sum for a feature film in 1937. 

=== Story development ===
On August 9, 1934, twenty-one pages of notes—entitled "Snowwhite suggestions"—were compiled by staff writer Richard Creedon, suggesting the principal characters, as well as situations and gags for the story. As Disney had stated at the very beginning of the project, the main attraction of the story for him was the Seven Dwarfs, and their possibilities for "screwiness" and "gags"; the three story meetings held in October and attended by Disney, Creedon, Larry Morey, Albert Hurter, Ted Sears and Pinto Colvig were dominated by such subjects. At this point, Disney felt that the story should begin with Snow Whites discovery of the Cottage of the Seven Dwarfs.  Walt Disney had suggested from the beginning that each of the dwarfs, whose names and personalities are not stated in the original fairy tale, could have individual personalities. The dwarfs names were chosen from a pool of about fifty potentials, including Jumpy, Deafy, Dizzey, Hickey, Wheezy, Baldy, Gabby, Nifty, Sniffy, Swift, Lazy, Puffy, Stuffy, Tubby, Shorty and Burpy. Bob Thomas, Disneys Art of Animation: From Mickey Mouse to Beauty and the Beast (Hyperion, New York, 1991) ISBN 1-56282-899-1  The seven finalists were chosen through a process of elimination. The leader of the dwarfs, required to be pompous, self-important and bumbling, was named Doc; others were named for their distinguishing character traits. At the end of the October story meetings, however, only Doc, Grumpy, Bashful, Sleepy and Happy of the final seven were named; at this point, Sneezy and Dopey were replaced by Jumpy and an unnamed seventh dwarf. 

Along with a focus on the characterizations and comedic possibilities of the dwarfs, Creedons eighteen-page outline of the story written from the October meetings, featured a continuous flow of gags as well as the Queens attempt to kill Snow White with a poisoned comb, an element taken from the Grimms original story. After persuading Snow White to use the comb, the disguised Queen would have escaped alive, but the dwarfs would have arrived in time to remove it. After the failure of the comb, the Queen was to have the Prince captured and taken to her dungeon, where she would have come to him (story sketches show this event both with the Queen and the Witch) and used magic to bring the dungeons skeletons to life, making them dance for him and identifying one skeleton as "Prince Oswald", an example of the more humorous atmosphere of this original story treatment.  It is written in story notes that the Queen has such magical power only in her own domain, the castle. With the Prince refusing to marry her, the Queen leaves him to his death (one sketch shows the Prince trapped in a subterranean chamber filling with water) John Canemaker, "Before the Animation Begins: The Life and Times of Disney inspirational Sketch Artists" (Hyperion, New York, 1999) ISBN 0-7868-6152-5  as she makes her way to the dwarfs cottage with the poisoned apple. The forest animals were to help the Prince escape the Queens minions and find his horse. The Prince was to ride to the cottage to save Snow White, but took the wrong road (despite warnings from the forest animals and his horse, whom he, unlike Snow White, could not understand). He therefore would not have arrived in time to save her from the Queen, but would have been able to save her with loves first kiss. This plot was not used in the final film, though many sketches of the scene in the dungeon were made by Ferdinand Hovarth.

Other examples of the more comical nature of the story at this point include suggestions for a fat, batty, cartoon type, self-satisfied Queen.  The Prince was also more of a clown, and was to serenade Snow White in a more comical fashion. Walt Disney encouraged all staff at the studio to contribute to the story, offering five dollars for every gag; such gags included the dwarfs noses popping over the foot of the bed when they first meet Snow White. 

Disney became concerned that such a comical approach would lessen the plausibility of the characters and, sensing that more time was needed for the development of the Queen, advised in an outline circulated on November 6 that attention be paid exclusively to "scenes in which only Snow White, the Dwarfs, and their bird and animal friends appear". The names and personalities of the dwarfs, however, were still "open to change". A meeting of November 16 resulted in another outline entitled Dwarfs Discover Snowwhite, which introduced the character of Dopey,  who would ultimately prove to be the most successful and popular of the dwarf characterisations.  For the rest of 1934 Disney further developed the story by himself, finding a dilemma in the characterization of the Queen, who he felt could no longer be fat and batty, but a stately beautiful type, a possibility already brought up in previous story meetings. Disney did not focus on the project again until the autumn of 1935. It is thought that he may have doubted his, and his studios ability, and that his trip to Europe that summer restored his confidence. At this point Disney and his writers focused on the scenes in which Snow White and the dwarfs are introduced to the audience and each other. He laid out the likely assignments for everyone working on the film in a memorandum of November 25, 1935, and had decided on the personalities of the individual dwarfs. 

It had first been thought that the dwarfs would be the main focus of the story, and many sequences were written for the seven characters. However, at a certain point, it was decided that the main thrust of the story was provided by the relationship between the Queen and Snow White. Frank Thomas and Ollie Johnston, The Illusion of Life: Disney Animation (Disney Editions, Italy, 1981) ISBN 0-7868-6070-7  For this reason, several sequences featuring the dwarfs were cut from the film. The first, which was animated in its entirety before being cut, showed Doc and Grumpy arguing about whether Snow White should stay with them. Another, also completely animated, would have shown the dwarfs eating soup noisily and messily; Snow White unsuccessfully attempts to teach them how to eat like gentlemen. A partially animated sequence involved the dwarfs holding a "lodge meeting" in which they try to think of a gift for Snow White; this was to be followed by the elaborate bed building sequence, in which the dwarfs and the forest animals construct and carve a bed for the princess. This also was cut, as it was thought to slow down the movement of the story.  The soup-eating and bed-building sequences were animated by Ward Kimball, who was sufficiently discouraged by their removal to consider leaving the studio, however Disney persuaded him to stay by promoting him to supervising animator of Jiminy Cricket in his next feature Pinocchio (1940 film)|Pinocchio (1940). John Canemaker, "Walt Disneys Nine Old Men and the Art of Animation" (Disney Editions, United States, 2001) ISBN 0-7868-6496-6 

=== Animation ===
 " sequence from Snow White was animated by Shamus Culhane.]]
 John Bauer the Queens Witch form. 

 
 Don Graham; the art teacher from the Chouinard Institute taught his first class at the studio on November 15, 1932, and was joined by Phil Dike a few weeks later.  These classes were principally concerned with human anatomy and movement, though instruction later included action analysis, animal anatomy and acting. Bruno Girveau (editor), Once Upon a Time&nbsp;— Walt Disney: The Sources of inspiration for the Disney Studios (Prestel, London, 2006) ISBN 978-3-7913-3770-8 

{{quote box
| width  = 22em
| align  = left
| quote  = The first duty of the cartoon is not to picture or duplicate real action or things as they actually happen&nbsp;— but to give a caricature of life and action&nbsp;— to picture on the screen things that have run thru the imagination of the audience to bring to life dream-fantasies and imaginative fancies that we have all thought of during our lives or have had pictured to us in various forms during our lives   I definitely feel that we cannot do the fantastic things, based on the real, unless we first know the real. This point should be brought out very clearly to all new men, and even the older men.
| source = Walt Disney in 1935 
}}

Though the classes were originally described as a "brutal battle", with neither instructor nor students well-versed in the others craft,  the enthusiasm and energy of both parties made the classes stimulating and beneficial for all involved. Graham often screened Disney shorts and, along with the animators, provided critique featuring both strengths and weaknesses. For example, Graham criticised Babbits animation of Abner the mouse in The Country Cousin as "taking a few of the obvious actions of a drunk without coordinating the rest of the body", while praising it for maintaining its humour without getting "dirty or mean or vulgar. The country mouse is always having a good time". 

Very few of the animators at the Disney studio had had artistic training (most had been newspaper cartoonists); among these few was Grim Natwick, who had trained in Europe. The animators success in designing and animating Betty Boop for Fleischer Studios showed an understanding of human female anatomy, and when Walt Disney hired Natwick he was given female characters to animate almost exclusively. Attempts to animate Persephone, the female lead of The Goddess of Spring, had proved largely unsuccessful; Natwicks animation of the heroine in Cookie Carnival showed greater promise, and the animator was eventually given the task of animating Snow White herself. Though live action footage of Snow White, the Prince and the Queen was shot as reference for the animators, the artists animators disapproved of rotoscoping, considering it to hinder the production of effective caricature. None of Babbits animation of the Queen was rotoscoped;  despite Graham and Natwicks objections, however, some scenes of Snow White and the Prince were directly traced from the live-action footage. 

The studios new Multiplane camera gave a three-dimensional feeling in many sequences, and was also used to give a rotating effect in the scene where the Queen transforms into a witch.

=== Music ===
 
 
 Paul J. Smith and Leigh Harline composed the incidental music score. Well-known songs from Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs include "Heigh-Ho", "Some Day My Prince Will Come", and "Whistle While You Work". Since Disney did not have its own music publishing company at the time, the publishing rights for the music and songs were administered through Bourne Co. Music Publishers, which continues to hold these rights. In later years, the studio was able to acquire back the rights to the music from many of the other films, but not Snow White. Snow White became the first American film to have a soundtrack album, released in conjunction with the feature film. Before Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, a film soundtrack recording was unheard of and of little value to a movie studio.

=== Cinematic influences === Romeo and Juliet (1936)&nbsp;— to which Disney made direct reference in a story meeting pertaining to the scene in which Snow White lies in her glass coffin&nbsp;— to the more obscure, including European silent cinema. Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, as well as the two Disney films to follow it, were also influenced by such German expressionist films as Nosferatu (1922) and The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (1919), both of which were recommended by Disney to his staff. This influence is particularly evident in the scenes of Snow White fleeing through the forest and the Queens transformation into the Witch. The latter scene was also inspired by Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde (1931 film)|Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde (1931), to which Disney made specific reference in story meetings. 

== Release ==

=== Original theatrical run ===
Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs premiered at the Carthay Circle Theatre on December 21, 1937, to a wildly receptive audience, many of whom were the same naysayers who dubbed the film "Disneys Folly".  The film received a standing ovation at its completion  from an audience that included Judy Garland and Marlene Dietrich.  Six days later, Walt Disney and the seven dwarfs appeared on the cover of Time (magazine)|Time magazine.  The New York Times said "Thank you very much, Mr. Disney".  Variety (magazine)|Variety suggested that "  perfect is the illusion, so tender the romance and fantasy, so emotional are certain portions when the acting of the characters strikes a depth comparable to the sincerity of human players, that the film approaches real greatness." 
 Gone with the Wind in 1940).   By the end of its original run, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs had earned $7,846,000 in international box office receipts.  This earned RKO a profit of $380,000. Richard Jewel, RKO Film Grosses: 1931–1951, Historical Journal of Film Radio and Television, Vol 14 No 1, 1994 p44 

=== Re-releases ===
Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was first re-released in 1944, to raise revenue for the Disney studio during the World War II period. This re-release set a tradition of re-releasing Disney animated features every seven to ten years, and Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was re-released to theaters in 1952, 1958, 1967, 1975, 1983, 1987 and 1993.  Coinciding with the fiftieth anniversary release in 1987, Disney released an authorized novelization of the story, written by childrens author Suzanne Weyn.  

In 1993, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs became the first film to be entirely scanned to digital files, manipulated, and recorded back to film. The restoration project was carried out entirely at 4K resolution and 10-bit color depth using the Cineon system to digitally remove dirt and scratches and restore faded colors. 

Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs has had a lifetime gross of $416 million across its original release and several reissues. Box-office
* 
*   Adjusted for inflation, and incorporating subsequent releases, the film still registers one of the top ten American film moneymakers of all time. 

=== Reception === Best Musical Oliver Jones. by Miles by Wynton Kelly, and Alexis Cole. 
 The Wizard black cast singing a jazz score.
 The Walt Alice in Peter Pan. 

; American Film Institute recognition:
The American Film Institute (AFI), an independent non-profit organization created in the United States by the National Endowment for the Arts,    releases a variety of annual awards and film lists recognizing excellence in film making. The AFI 100 Years... series, which ran from 1998 to 2008, created categorized lists of Americas best movies as selected by juries composed from among over 1,500 artists, scholars, critics and historians. A films inclusion in one of these lists was based on the films popularity over time, historical significance and cultural impact.    Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was selected by juries for inclusion on many AFI lists, including the following:

* AFIs 100 Years... 100 Movies - #49 
* AFIs 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - #34 
* AFIs 10 Top 10 - #1 Animated film 
*   - #10 Villain 
* AFIs 100 Years... 100 Songs:
** "Someday My Prince Will Come" - #19 
** "Whistle While You Work" - Nominated 
* AFIs 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes: "Magic Mirror on the wall, who is the fairest one of all?" - Nominated 
* AFIs Greatest Movie Musicals - Nominated 

=== Home media === Walt Disney Animated Classics series. 

Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was released on DVD on October 9, 2001, the first in Walt Disney Platinum Editions|Disneys Platinum Editions, and featured, across two discs, the digitally restored film, a making-of documentary narrated by Angela Lansbury, an audio commentary by John Canemaker and, via archived audio clips, Walt Disney. 
 Diamond Editions, and a new DVD edition was released on November 24, 2009. The Blu-ray includes a high-definition version of the movie sourced from a new restoration by Lowry Digital, a DVD copy of the film, and several bonus features not included on the 2001 DVD. This set returned to the Disney Vault on April 30, 2011. 

== Media ==

=== Theme parks === Evil Queen with a visitor in 2012.]]
 Disneyland Paris.  Fantasyland at Walt Disney Worlds Magic Kingdom   is currently undergoing an expansion due to end in early 2014. The Snow Whites Scary Adventures ride has closed and will be replaced with Princess Fairytale Hall, where Snow White and other princesses will be located for a meet and greet. Included in the 2013 expansion of Fantasyland is the Seven Dwarfs Mine Train roller coaster.  Snow White, her Prince, the Queen (both in the form of a regent and a hag), and the Seven Dwarfs are also featured in parades and character appearances throughout the parks. Disneylands Fantasyland Theater hosted Snow White: An Enchanting Musical from 2004 to 2006.

=== Video games ===
*The first attempt at a Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs video game was for the Atari 2600 as part of their line of childrens games.  It was never officially released, although a "homebrew (video games)|homebrew" version was made available on a limited basis. 

*Walt Disneys Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was released for the Game Boy Color system in 2001. 

*Snow White also makes an appearance in the   for the PlayStation Portable|PSP. 

*In 2013s free-to-play mobile game Snow White: Queens Return (also known as Seven Dwarfs: The Queens Return),  an uncanonical continuation of the film, the Queen has survived the fall at the climax of the film and then reverted to her youthful form to cast a curse on Snow White and the dwarfs and their entire forest. 

=== Broadway musical === Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (also known as Snow White Live!) at the Radio City Music Hall.  Music and lyrics for four new songs were created by Jay Blackton and Joe Cook, respectively; titles included "Welcome to the Kingdom of Once Upon a Time" and "Will I Ever See Her Again?".  It ran from October 18 to November 18, 1979 and January 11 to March 9, 1980, a total of 106 performances. 

=== Canceled prequel ===
In the 2000s, DisneyToon Studios began development on a computer-animated prequel to Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, titled The Seven Dwarfs. Director Mike Disa and screenwriter Evan Spiliotopoulos pitched a story explaining how the Dwarfs met, and how the Evil Queen killed Snow Whites father and took the throne. According to Disa, DisneyToon management changed the prequel to center around how Dopey lost his voice upon witnessing the death of his mother. After Disney purchased Pixar in 2006, John Lasseter, DisneyToons new Chief Creative Officer, canceled Dwarfs. 

=== Other appearances ===
The Seven Dwarfs made rare appearances in shorts, despite their popularity; they simply were too numerous to animate efficiently. Commissioned shorts The Standard Parade (1939), The Seven Wise Dwarfs (1941, using mostly recycled footage), All Together (1942) and The Winged Scourge (1943) all include appearances. 
 Once Upon a Time regularly include live-action interpretations of characters including Snow White, the Evil Queen and Grumpy.

A 1937–1938 newspaper comic strip adaptation was republished repeatedly as a comic book, most recently in 1995. 

== See also ==
* List of animated feature-length films
* List of Disney animated features
* List of Disney animated films based on fairy tales
 

== References ==
 
;Bibliography
 
:* 
:*Holliss, Richard and Brian Sibley (1994).  
:* 
:* 
:*Krause, Martin and Linda Witowski (1994).  
 

== External links ==
 
 
*  
*   at Disney.com
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
Streaming audio
*  on Lux Radio Theater: December 26, 1938. Guest appearance by Walt Disney.
*  on Screen Guild Theater: December 23, 1946

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 