Bhoothakkannadi
{{Infobox film
| name           = Bhoothakkannadi
| image          = Bhoothakkannadi.gif
| caption        =
| director       = Lohithadas
| producer       = Puthoor Narayanan Nair (producer) N. Krishnakumar (Kireedam Unni) (producer) V. Mani (executive producer) Lal Jose (associate producer)
| writer         = Lohithadas
| starring       = Mammootty Johnson Kaithapram Venu
| editing        = G. Murali
| distributor    =
| released       =  
| runtime        = 115 minutes
| country        = India
| language       = Malayalam
| budget         =
}} National Film Filmfare Award for Best Actor.

== Synopsis ==

The movie opens with Vidyadharan serving the jail imprisonment for a murder.

In flashback it is revealed that Vidyadharan, a small village clocksmith and a widower, lived with his only daughter. His wife had died from a snake bite years ago. However, his childhood friend and love interest Sarojini lives next to his house. Sarojini was left by her husband after living together only for a night from which she has a daughter who has grown to a teenager. Vidyadharan is phobic of snakes possibly due to his wifes death. He carries a flashlight through the village lanes even in broad daylight.

Although Vidyadharans extended family disapproves of his on-off relationship with Sarojini, his daughter and Sarojinis daughter are like sisters. We are introduced to a host of supporting characters in the sleepy palakkadan hamlet like Vidyadarans sister, his friend near watch repairing shop, the drunkard who carries a rifle, etc.

Their simple world in the sleepy hamlet is turned upside down one day as Sarojinis teenage daughter goes missing. After much investigations, her body is found inside a cave on a hilltop. It is revealed that she was gang raped. There is no evidence pointing to anyone: yet another case of sexual offence against girls in the area.

Deep inside, Vidyadharan feels that it is the drunk hunter who is behind the crime. While the police investigates and declares the hunter innocent, a battle of words ensue between Vidyadharan and the hunter and, by mistake, Vidyadharan kills the hunter and hence is serving the imprisonment.

He leads a calm life inside the prison campus and is a pet of the jail warden. While Sarojini visits Vidyadharan frequently, his daughter had been taken away by her mothers family.

During one of her visits, Sarojini tells him that she met Vidyadharans daughter and that she has grown up. He wishes to meet her but is informed that her mothers family will not give her the permission to do so. During the visit, Sarojini also apprises Vidyadharan about the increasing number of rapes and molestations and recounts the fate of her daughter. Vidyadharan is visibly disturbed by this social scenario, more so as his daughter is growing up in such a society. He starts developing the anxiousness and insecurity of a father of an adolescent girl.

Vidyadharans release date comes nearer. During one of Sarojinis visit, he tells her that, upon release, he would go to a land far away with Sarojini and his daughter and will live happily. He entrusts Sarojini the job of bringing his daughter from her maternal home after convincing her. Sarojini agrees.

As days are nearing for the release, Vidyadharan is happy and roams around the jail. During his regular afternoon strolls, to his surprise, Vidyadharan find a hole in the thick jail wall. Vidyadharan tactfully clears the hole and uses his magnifying lens to check if he is able to view something. To his luck, he finds that the eyesize hole is dug through the entire thickness and he is able to see the hilltop just outside the jail. Vidyadharan is amused but is careful not to let the inmates and constables know about it, especially with his release date being so close.

During his free time, Vidyadharan sees the small family of blind singers living on the hilltop and their beautiful daughter. He sees their small-time existence and how beautifully they sing. He finds that one of the jail constables is intervening in their life, telling them to move out of the place. When Vidyadharan meets this constable inside the jail, he is unable to express his anger. He recollects the misbehaviour of the same man once Sarojini visited him. Vidyadharan concludes that the constable is not a good man.

The other day Vidyadharan witnesses a celebration in the small hut of blind singers. It is revealed that the beautiful daughter has become adolescent. Vidyadharan is very happy as his own daughter would be of the same age.

As he looks on another day, while the beautiful teenage girl is alone in the hut, he sees the cruel poilceman going inside. This is followed by the girls shrieks and violent cry for help. As she comes running outside, Vidyadharan sees the police constable chasing her like a mad dog. Vidyadharan tries to seek help, but his voice is not heard. Stranded within the campus, Vidyadharan is totally helpless.

The blind singers come back home to find the shocking news. They are shattered and, in the heat of loss they suffered, they decide to punish themselves by setting fire to the house and themselves. Vidyadharan watches as the silent spectator.

The next morning the constable comes in front of the inmates for checking. Vidyadharan has lost all control by now and he attacks the constable accusing him of the life of the three innocent people. The inmates and the jail warden run in. Vidyadharan shows the hole and describes the entire episode to the jailer. The jailer hears in disbelief and orders both Vidyadharan and the constable to be taken for medical aid.

The jailer inspects the hole and feels sorry for Vidyadharan. As he leaves, the camera zooms towards the hole. It is revealed that there is no such hole there and it is just a small piece of mortar that has detached from the cement on the strong wall. The hole and the entire episode was an imagination of Vidyadharans turbulent state of mind.

As Sarojini comes to the jail with Vidyadharans daughter, he has a blank face, turns towards them and asks "Aara?"  . The movie concludes with the aerial shot of a train departing from the station.

== Cast ==
* Mammootty as Vidyadharan
* Sree Lakshmy as Sarojini
* Cherthala Lalitha as Sarada, Vidyadharans sister
* Sindhu as Minikutty, Sarojinis daughter
* Remya as Srikutty, Vidyadharans daughter
* Rizabawa as prison warden
* Srihari as Hunter
* Preingottu Vijayan as Saradas husband
* Kalabhavan Mani as Ayyappan
* M. R. Gopakumar as Balakrishnan
* Kavya Madhavan as Meenu
* Chali Pala  as Chacko

==References==
 

== External links ==
*  

 
 

 
 