Doctor Zhivago (film)
 
 
 
{{Infobox film
| name           = Doctor Zhivago
| image          = DrZhivago_Asheet.jpg
| image_size     =
| alt            =
| caption        = Theatrical release poster design by Tom Jung
| director       = David Lean
| producer       = Carlo Ponti
| screenplay     = Robert Bolt
| based on       =  
| starring       =  Omar Sharif Julie Christie Tom Courtenay Alec Guinness Geraldine Chaplin Rod Steiger
| music          = Maurice Jarre
| cinematography = Freddie Young Nicolas Roeg  
| editing        = Norman Savage
| studio         = Sostar S.A.
| distributor    = Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
| released       =  
| runtime        = 197 minutes 193 minutes   200 minutes   192 minutes  
| country        = United Kingdom United States
| language       = English Russian
| budget         = $11 million
| gross          = $111.7 million (U.S.)   
}} epic Drama romance film novel of the same name, immensely popular in the Western world|West, but banned in the Soviet Union at the time. For this reason, the film could not be made there and was instead filmed mostly in Spain.

The critics were generally disappointed, complaining of its length at over three hours, and claiming that it trivialised history, but acknowledging the intensity of the romantic drama and the treatment of human themes. Over time, however, the films reputation has improved greatly. It is now regarded as among David Leans finest films,  as well as one of the best films of the epic genre, ranking it the 39th greatest American film of all time.  The film won five Academy Awards, and as of 2014 is the eighth List of highest-grossing films|highest-grossing film of all time, adjusted for inflation. 

==Plot== Russian Revolution of 1917, and the Russian Civil War. A narrative framing device, set in the late 1940s to early 1950s, involves KGB Lieutenant General Yevgraf Andreyevich Zhivago (Alec Guinness) searching for the daughter of his half brother, Doctor Yuri Andreyevich Zhivago (Omar Sharif), and Larissa ("Lara") Antipova (Julie Christie). Yevgraf believes a young woman, Tanya Komarova (Rita Tushingham), may be his niece and tells her the story of her fathers life.

When Yuri Zhivago is orphaned after his mothers death, he is taken in by his mothers friends, Alexander "Pasha" (Ralph Richardson) and Anna (Siobhán McKenna) Gromeko, and grows up with their daughter Tonya (Geraldine Chaplin) in Moscow.

  attack a peaceful demonstration.]]
In 1913, Zhivago, as a medical student in training, but a poet at heart, meets Tonya as she returns to Moscow after a long trip to Paris. Lara, meanwhile, is involved in an affair with the older and well-connected Victor Ipolitovich Komarovsky (Rod Steiger), a friend of her mothers (Adrienne Corri). That night, the idealistic reformer Pavel Pavlovich ("Pasha") Antipov (Tom Courtenay) drifts into left-wing extremism after being wounded by sabre-wielding Cossacks during a peaceful demonstration. Pasha runs to Lara, whom he wants to marry, to treat his wound. He asks her to hide a gun he picked up at the demonstration. Laras mother discovers her affair with Komarovsky and attempts suicide. Komarovsky summons help from his physician (Geoffrey Keen), Zhivagos former professor, whom he accompanies back to Laras home to treat her mother. When Komarovsky learns of Laras intentions to marry Pasha, he tries to dissuade Lara, and then rapes her. In revenge, Lara takes the pistol she has been hiding for Pasha and shoots Komarovsky at a Christmas Eve party, wounding him. Komarovsky insists no action be taken against Lara, who is escorted out by Pasha. Zhivago tends Komarovskys wound. Although enraged and devastated by Laras affair with Komarovsky, Pasha marries Lara, and they have a daughter named Katya.
 German forces. Lara enlists as a nurse to search for him. Yuri Zhivago is drafted and becomes a battlefield doctor.

During the February Revolution in 1917, Zhivago enlists Laras help to tend to the wounded. Together they run a field hospital for six months, during which time radical changes ensue throughout Russia as Vladimir Lenin arrives in Moscow. Before their departure, Yuri and Lara fall in love, but Yuri remains true to Tonya, who is now his wife.

After the war, Yuri returns to his wife Tonya, son Sasha, and Alexander, whose house in Moscow has been divided into tenements by the new Soviet government. Yevgraf, now a member of the CHEKA, informs him his poems have been condemned by Soviet censors as antagonistic to Communism. Yevgraf arranges for passes and documents in order for Yuri and his family to escape from the new political capital of Moscow to the far-away Gromeko estate at Varykino, in the Ural Mountains. Zhivago, Tonya, Sasha, and Alexander board a heavily guarded cattle train, at which time they are informed that they will be travelling through contested territory, which is being secured by the infamous Bolshevik commander named Strelnikov.

While the train is stopped, Zhivago wanders away. He stumbles across the armoured train of Strelnikov sitting on a hidden siding. Yuri is summoned before Strelnikov, whom he recognizes as the former Pasha Antipov. During a tense interview, Strelnikov informs Yuri that his estranged wife Lara is now living in the town of Yuriatin, then occupied by the anti-Communist White Army forces. He permits Zhivago to return to his family, although it is hinted by Strelnikovs right-hand man that most people interrogated by Strelnikov end up being shot.

The family lives a peaceful life in a cottage at the Varykino estate until Zhivago finds Lara in nearby Yuriatin, at which point they surrender to their long-repressed feelings. When Tonya becomes pregnant, Yuri breaks off with Lara, only to be abducted and conscripted into service by Communist partisans (military)|partisans.

After two years, Zhivago at last deserts and trudges through the deep snow to Yuriatin where he finds Lara. Lara tells Yuri that Tonya had discovered her while searching for him, and that his family is now in Moscow. She reveals a sealed letter Tonya had mailed to Lara 6 months ago to give to Yuri: Tonya, her father, and their children are being deported and will live in Paris. Yuri and Lara renew their relationship.

One night, Komarovsky arrives and informs them they are being watched by the CHEKA due to Laras connection by marriage to Strelnikov and Yuris "counter-revolutionary" poetry and desertion. Komarovsky offers Yuri and Lara his help in leaving Russia. They refuse. Instead, they return to the abandoned Varykino estate, taking up residence in the banned main house, where Yuri begins writing the "Lara" poems. These will later make him famous but also incur government displeasure. Komarovsky reappears and tells Yuri that Strelnikov was captured only five miles away while apparently returning to Lara, but then committed suicide en route to his own execution. Therefore Lara is in immediate danger of execution herself, as the CHEKA had only left her free to lure Strelnikov out of hiding. Zhivago sends Lara and Katya away with Komarovsky, who has been appointed a government official in the Far East. Refusing to accompany a man he despises, Yuri remains behind to face his fate.

Years later, Yevgraf finds a destitute Yuri in Moscow during the Stalinist era and gives him a new suit and a job. While riding a tram, Yuri spots a woman he surely thinks is Lara walking on a nearby street. Unable to call her from the tram, Yuri struggles to get off at the next stop. Yuri runs after her but suffers a fatal heart attack before he can even signal to her, and the woman walks away oblivious to Yuris presence. Yuris funeral is well attended, as his poetry is already being published openly due to shifts in politics. Lara informs Yevgraf she had given birth to Yuris daughter, but lost her in the collapse of the Occupation of Mongolia|White-controlled government in Mongolia. After vainly looking over hundreds of orphans with Yevgrafs help, Lara disappears during Joseph Stalins Great Purge, and "died or vanished somewhere...in one of the labour camps," according to Yevgraf.

While Yevgraf strongly feels that Tanya Komarova is Yuris and Laras daughter, he is still not convinced. But as Tanya leaves, Yevgraf notices that she carries a balalaika, an instrument that Yuris mother was renowned for playing. Questioning her further, he learns that Tanya is self-taught—in fact, her fiancé proclaims her an artist with the balalaika. Yevgraf smiles, "Ah. Then its a gift," thereby implying she truly must be Yuris and Laras daughter after all.

==Cast==
 
* Omar Sharif&nbsp;– Dr. Yuri Zhivago
* Julie Christie&nbsp;– Lara Antipov
* Rod Steiger&nbsp;– Victor Ipolitovich Komarovsky
* Alec Guinness&nbsp;– General Yevgraf Zhivago
* Geraldine Chaplin&nbsp;– Tonya Gromeko
* Tom Courtenay&nbsp;– Pasha Antipov / "Strelnikov"
* Ralph Richardson&nbsp;– Alexander Maximovich Gromeko
* Siobhán McKenna&nbsp;– Anna Gromeko
* Rita Tushingham&nbsp;– Tanya Komarova / "The Girl"
* Adrienne Corri&nbsp;– Amelia
* Bernard Kay&nbsp;– Kuril
* Geoffrey Keen&nbsp;– Prof. Boris Kurt
* Klaus Kinski&nbsp;– Kostoyed Amoursky
* Jeffrey Rockland&nbsp;– Sasha
* Gerard Tichy&nbsp;– Liberius
* Noel Willman&nbsp;– Razin
 

==Background== 1957 novel was published in the West amidst celebration and controversy. Parts of Pasternaks book had been known in Samizdat since some time after World War II. However, the novel was not completed until 1956. The book had to be smuggled out of the Soviet Union by an Italian called Dangelo to whom Pasternak had entrusted the book to be delivered to Giangiacomo Feltrinelli, a left-wing Italian publisher who published it shortly thereafter. Helped by a Soviet campaign against the novel, it became a sensation throughout the non-communist world. It spent 26 weeks atop the New York Times best-seller list|New York Times best-seller list.

A great lyric poet, Pasternak was awarded the 1958 Nobel Prize for Literature. While the citation noted his poetry, it was understood that the prize was mainly for Doctor Zhivago, which the Soviet government saw as an anti-Soviet work, thus interpreting the award of the Nobel Prize as a gesture hostile to the Soviet Union. A target of the Soviet governments fervent campaign to label him a traitor, Pasternak felt compelled to refuse the Prize. The situation became an international cause célèbre and made Pasternak a Cold War symbol of resistance to Soviet communism, a role the poet was ill-suited for.
 civil war.   
 Church Slavonic for "the living". 

In the true manner of the Russian epic novel, characters constantly meet due to coincidence, though this is less apparent in the film.

==Production==
  Lawrence of Billy Liar (1963), and the recommendation of John Ford, who directed her in Young Cassidy (1965).  Sharifs son Tarek was cast as the young Zhivago in the film and Sharif directed his son as a way to get closer to his character  

  between Spain and Portugal.]]
Since the book was banned in the Soviet Union, the movie was filmed largely in Spain over ten months,  with the entire Moscow set being built from scratch outside of Madrid. Most of the scenes covering Zhivago and Laras service in World War I were filmed in Soria, as was the Varykino estate.  The "ice-palace" at Varykino was filmed in Soria as well, a house filled with frozen beeswax. The charge of the partisans across the frozen lake was filmed in Spain, too; a cast iron sheet was placed over a dried river-bed, and fake snow (mostly marble dust) was added on top. Some of the winter scenes were filmed in summer with warm temperatures, sometimes of up to 25&nbsp;°C (77&nbsp;°F). Other locations include the Estación de Madrid-Delicias in Madrid and El Moncayo. The initial and final scenes were shot at the Aldeadávila Dam between Spain and Portugal. Although uncredited, most of the scenes were actually shot on the Portuguese side of the river, overlooking the Spanish side.

Some of the winter sequences, mostly landscape scenes and Yuris escape from the partisans, were filmed in Finland. Winter scenes of the family travelling to Yuriatin by rail were filmed in Canada.
 RENFE Class 240 (ex-1400 MZA), and Strelnikovs armoured train is towed by the RENFE Class 282 Mikado locomotive.

==Reception==
The film was entered into the 1966 Cannes Film Festival.   

Despite being a spectacular box office hit, Doctor Zhivago received mixed reviews at the time of its release. It was criticised for its length and overly romantic depiction of the affair between Zhivago and Lara. Film critic Roger Ebert, while liking the film, said of Doctor Zhivago that "it lumbers noisily from nowhere to nowhere", and that Omar Sharifs performance was "soulful but bewildered". In general, the films critics have found Doctor Zhivago too overly romantic and almost at the level of soap opera, with the (in their view) syrupy Laras Theme at the top of their complaints. (The song was a major hit when it was released on record.)

Bosley Crowther of the New York Times said that Zhivago and Lara are "possessed by a strange passivity".  Sometimes those same critics who found the length of the film overbearing also found the depiction of historical events too facile.

The final scene, in which a rainbow appears over a dam as the final credits were rolled onscreen, was criticized as being "pro-Soviet" by more conservative critics, who felt it was signifying that the Soviet Union had a bright future. Screenwriter Robert Bolt, who adapted the novel, was a one-time member of the British Communist Party (leaving the Party in 1947  ) and well-known leftist who was prominent in the nuclear disarmament campaign, itself seen as a surrogate of the Cold War struggle between the West and the Soviet Bloc.    Since director David Lean was apolitical, the shot likely was created due to the beauty of its image, not as political symbolism. 

Since the film takes the viewpoint of the dreamy poet Zhivago, the physician side of Zhivago is rarely in evidence. Zhivago writes poems for Lara near the end of their relationship, but the audience never hears the poems. Zhivagos poetry is included in a supplement at the end of the novel, and critics carped that the film, unlike the book, is shorn of the poetry, and that showing a writer at work is inherently boring.

On the plus side, many critics acknowledge that film addresses such grand themes as a dramatic period in world history, the ascendance of life over death, the struggle of the individual against the state, the triumph of the heart over the mind, and the way good intentions can go terribly wrong. One of the strongest points of Doctor Zhivago is the startling visuals, with Bosley Crowther calling the photography "brilliant, tasteful, and exquisite as any ever put on the screen.  Director of Photography Freddie Young won an Academy Award for his color cinematography. 

Rod Steigers performance as Victor Komarovsky is a memorable acting tour de force. 
 Lawrence of A Passage to India.

As with the novel itself, the film was banned in the Soviet Union. It was not shown in Russia until 1994.

Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gives the film an 85% Fresh rating. 

===American Film Institute recognition===
* AFIs 100 Years... 100 Movies – No. 39
* AFIs 100 Years... 100 Passions – No. 7
* AFIs 100 Years of Film Scores – Nominated 
* AFIs 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) – Nominated 
* AFIs 10 Top 10 – Nominated Epic Film 

==Awards==
The film won five Academy Awards and was nominated for five more:      
;Won Best Art Direction (John Box, Terence Marsh, Dario Simoni) Best Cinematography (Freddie Young) Best Adapted Screenplay (Robert Bolt) Best Costume Design Best Original Score (Maurice Jarre)

;Nominated Best Picture (Carlo Ponti) Best Supporting Actor (Tom Courtenay) Best Director (David Lean) Best Editing Best Sound (A. W. Watkins, Franklin Milton, MGM Sound Department)
 Love Story, One Flew A Star Is Born for the most wins by a film
;Won
* Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture - Drama
* Golden Globe Award for Best Director - Motion Picture (David Lean)
* Golden Globe Award for Best Actor - Motion Picture Drama (Omar Sharif)
* Golden Globe Award for Best Screenplay (Robert Bolt)
* Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score (Maurice Jarre)

==Home video== digital restoration of the film was done by Warner Bros. motion picture imaging.  The digital pictures were frame by frame digitally restored at Prasad Corporation to remove dirt, tears, scratches and other artifacts, restoring the films original look.

==See also==
* BFI Top 100 British films

==References==
 

==External links==
 
 
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 